1660-05-23

In the morning came infinite of people on board from the
King, to go along with him. My Lord, Mr. Crew, and others go on
shore to meet the King as he comes off from shore. Where (Sir R.
Stayner bringing His Majesty into the boat) I hear that His Majesty
did with a great deal of affection kiss my Lord upon his first
meeting. The King, with the two Dukes, the Queen of Bohemia,
Princesse Royalle, and Prince of Orange, came on board; where Iin
their coming in kissed the Kings, Queen and Princesses hands,
having done the other before. Infinite shooting off of the guns, and
that in a disorder on purpose, which was better thenif it had been
otherwise. Dined in a great deal of state, the Royall company by
themselfs in the coach, which was a blessed sight to see. After
dinner, the King and Duke altered the name of some of the Shipps,
viz. the Nazeby into Charles [etc.]. That done, the Queen, Princess
Royall, and Prince of Orange took leave of the King, and the Duke
of Yorke went on board the London, and the Duke of Glocester the
Swiftsure — which done, we weighed Ancre, and with a fresh gale
and most happy weather we set sail for England — all the afternoon
the King walking here and there, up and down — (quite contrary to
what I thought him to have been), very active and stirring. Upon
the Quarter-deck he fell in discourse of his escape from Worcester.
Where it made me ready to weep to hear the stories that he told of
his difficulties that he had passed through. As his travelling four
days and three nights on foot, every step up to the knees in dirt,
with nothing but a green coat and a pair of country breeches on and
a pair of country shoes, that made him so sore all over his feet that
49
he could scarce stir. His sitting at table at one place, where the
master of the house, that had not seen him in eight years, did know
him but kept it private; when at the same table there was one that
had been of his own Regiment at Worcester, could not know him
but made him drink the Kings health and said that the King was at
least four fingers higher then he. In another place, at his Inn, the
master of the house, as the King was standing with his hands upon
the back of a chair by the fireside, he kneeled down and kissed his
hand privately, saying that he would not ask him who he was, but
bid God bless him whither that he was going.