1660-07-30

To my Lord and with him to Whitehall, where I saw a great
many fine Antique heads of marble that my Lord Northumberland
hath given the King. Here meeting with Mr. De Cretz, he looked
over many of the pieces in the gallery with me and told me whose
hands they were, with great pleasure. Dined at home and Mr.
Hawly with me upon six of my pigeons which my wife is resolved
to kill here. This day came Will my boy to me, the wench
continuing lame so that my wife could not be longer without
somebody to help her. To Mr. Crews, and there took money and
paid Mrs. Anne, Mrs. Jemimahs maid, off quite. And so she went
away and another came to her. To Whitehall with Mr. Moore,
where I met with a letter from Mr. Turner of the Navy office,
offering me 150l to be joined with me in my patent, and to advise
58
30 June—3 July 1660
me how to improve the advantage of my place and to keep off
Barlow. To my Lord’s till late at night, and so home.
~%JULY%-
1. This morning came home my fine Camlott cloak with gold
buttons — anda silk suit; which cost me much money andI pray God
to make me be able to pay for it. I went to the cook’s and got a good
joint of meat, and my wife and I dined at home alone. In the
afternoon to the Abbey, where a good sermon by astranger, but no
Common Prayer yet.
2. Infinite of business, that my heart and head and all was full. Met
with Purser Washington, with whom andalady, a friend of his, I
dined at the Bell Taverne in King’s street; but the rogue had no
more manners then to invite me thither and to let me pay my club.
All the afternoon with my Lord, going up and down the town. At 7
at night he went home, and there the Principall officers of the
Navy;' among the rest, myself was reckoned one. We had order to
meet tomorrow to draw up such an order of the Council as would
put us in action before our patents were passed — at which my heart
was glad. At night supped with my Lord, he and I together in the
great dining-room alone by ourselfs, the first time that ever I did it
- in London. Home to bed. My maid pretty well again.
3. All the morning, the officers and commissioners of the Navy,
we met at Sir G. Carteret’s chamber and agreed upon orders for the
Council to supersede the old and impower us to act. In the
afternoon my heart was quite pulled down by being told that Mr.
Barlow was to enquire today for Mr. Coventry. But at night I met
with my Lord, who told me that I need not fear, for he would get
me the place against the world. And when I came to W. Howe, he
told me that Dr. Petty hath been with my Lord and did tell him that
Barlow was asickly man and did not entend to execute the place for
himself; which put me in great comfort again. Till 2 in the morning
writing letters and things for my Lord to send to sea. So home to
my wife to bed.
1. The Principal Officers of the Navy Board (at this time the Treasurer,
Comptroller, Surveyor, Clerk of the Acts and three Commissioners).
$9