1660-06-31

This day my Lord took Phisique — and came not out of his
chamber. All the morning making orders. After dinner, a great
while below in the great Cabbin, trying with W. Howe some of
Mr. Lawes’s songs, perticularly that of What is a kisse, with which
we had a great deal of pleasure. After that to making of orders
again. The captain of the Assistance, Capt. Sparling, brought me
this afternoon a pair of silk stockings, of a light blue, which I was
much pleased with. The Captain and I to supper. And after that, a
most pleasant walk till 10 at night with him upon the Deck, it being
a fine evening. My pain was gone again that Ihad yesterday, blessed
be God.
This day, the Month end, lin very good health. And all the world
52
31 May-2 June 1660
in a merry mood because of the King’s coming. I expect every
minute to hear by Mr. Cooke how my poor wife doth. This day I
begun to teach Mr. Edwd., who I find to have a very good
Foundation laid for his Latin by Mr. Fuller. I find myself in all
things well as to body and mind, but only for the absence of my
wife.
~ JUNE-
1. Atnight Mr. Cooke comes from London with letters — leaving
all things there very gallant and joyful. And brought us word that
the Parliament had ordered the 29 of May, the King’s birthday, to
be for ever kept as a day of thanksgiving for our redemption from
tyranny and the King’s return to his Government, he entering
London that day. My wife was in London when he came thither,
and hath been there a week with Mr. Bowyer and his wife. My poor
wife hath not been well a week before; but thanks be to God, is well
again. She would fain see me and be at her house again, but we must
be content. She writes me word how the Joyces go very rich and
grow very Proud; but it is no matter. And that there was a talk that I
should be knighted by the King; which they laugh at, but I think
myself happier in my wife and estate then they are in theirs. To bed.
2. Being with my Lord in the morning about business in his
Cabbin, I took occasion to give him thanks for his love to me in the
share that he had given me of his Majestys money and the Dukes.
He told me that he hoped to do me a more lasting kindness, if all
things stand as they are now between him and the King — but says
“We must havealittle patience and we will rise together. In the
meantime I will do you all the good Jobbs I can.”” Which was great
content for me to hear from my Lord. All the morning with the
Captain, computing how much the 30 ships that came with the
King from Scheveling their pay comes to for a month (because the
King promised to give them all a month’s pay) and it comes to
65381: and the Charles perticularly, 777]. I wish we had the money.
All the afternoon with two or three captains in the Captain’s cabin,
drinking of white wine and sugar and eating pickled oysters —
where Capt. Sparling told us the best Story that ever I heard; about
$3
a gentleman that persuaded a country fellow to let him gut his
oysters or else they would stink.