1660-05-27

Lords day. Called up by John Goods to see the Garter and
Heralds coate which lay in the coach, brought by Sir Edwd.
Walker, King-at-armes, this morning for my Lord. My Lord hath
summoned all the commanders on board him to see the ceremony.
Which was thus: Sir Edw., putting on his Coate and having laid the
George and Garter and the King’s letter to my Lord upon a
Crimson Cushion (in the coach, all the commanders standing by),
makes three congees to him, holding the Cushion in his arms. Then
laying it down with the things upon it upon a chair — he takes the
letter and delivers it to my Lord, which my Lord breaks open and
gives him to read. It was directed to “Our trusty and well beloved
Sir Edw. Montagu, Knight, one of our Generalls-at-sea, and our
Companion-elect of our Noble Order of the Garter.”” The contents
of the letter is to show that the Kings of England have for many
years made use of this Honour as a special mark of favour to persons
of good extraction and virtue (and that many Emperors, Kings and
Princes of other countries have borne this honour) and that whereas
my Lord is of a noble family and hath now done the King such
service by sea at this time as he hath done, he doth send him this
George and Garter to wear as Knight of that Order, with a
dispensation for the other ceremony of the Habitt of the Order and
other things till hereafter when it can be done. So the Herald,
putting the ribbon about his neck and the garter about his left leg —
he salutes him with joy as Knight of the Garter, and that was all. My
Lord and the ship’s company down to Sermon. I stayed above to
write, and look over my new song-book, which came last night to
me from London in lieu of that that my Lord had of me. The
officers being all on board, there was not room for me at table, so I
dined in my Cabbin; where among other things, Mr. Dunn
brought me a Lobster and a bottle of oyle instead of a bottle of
Vinegar, whereby Ispoiled my dinner. Many orders in the ordering
of ships this afternoon. Late to a sermon. After that up to the
SI
Lieutenant’s Cabbin, where Mr. Sheply,.I, and the Minister
supped. And after that Iwent down to W. Howe’s Cabbin and there
with a great deal of pleasure sang till it was late. After that to bed.