1660-02-07

Inthe morning, I went early to give Mr. Hawly notice of my
being forced to go into London; but he having also business, we left
13
our office business to Mr. Spicer and he and I walked as far as the
Temple, where Ihalted a little and then went to Pauls schoole; but it
being too soon, I went and drank my morning draught with my
Cosen Tom. Pepys the turner, and saw his house and shop. Thence
to school, where he that made the speech for the seventh form, in
praise of the Founder,’ did show a book that Mr. Crumlum had
lately got, which is believed to be of the Founder’s own writing.
After all the speeches, in which my Brother John came off as well as
any of the rest, Iwent straight home and dined. Mr. Moore told me
of a picture hung up at the Exchange, of a great pair of buttocks
shitting of a turd into Lawsons mouth, and over it was writ “The
thanks of\the House.”” Boys do now cry “Kiss my Parliament”’
instead of ‘Kiss my arse,” so great and general a contempt is the
Rump come to among all men, good and bad.
g. Assoonas out of my bed, I wrote letters into the country to go
by the carrier today. Before Iwas out of my bed, Iheard the soldiers
very busy in the morning, getting their horses ready where they lay
at Hiltons, but I knew not then their meaning in so doing. After I
had writ my letters, I went to Westminster. In the Hall, |
understand how Monke is this morning gone into London with his
army; and met with Mr. Fage, who told me that he doth believe that
Monke is gone to secure some of the Common Council of the City,
who were very high yesterday there and did vote that they would
not pay any taxes till the House was filled up. I called at Mr.
Harpers, who told me how Monke had this day clapped up many of
the Common Council, and that the Parliament had voted that he
should pull down their gates and portcullisses, their posts and their
chains, which he doth entend to do, and doth lie in the City all
night. I went home and got some Allum to my mouth, where Ihave
the beginnings of a Cancre, and have also a plaster to my boyle
underneath my chin.