1660-12-10

Up exceeding early to go to the Comptroller, thinking to
have gone with him to Whitehall. But he not being up and it being a
very fine bright Moonshine morning, I went and walked all alone
twenty turns in Cornhill, from gracious streete corner to the
Stockes and back again — from 6 a-clock till past 7 — so long that I
was weary: and going to the Controller’s, thinking to find him
ready, I find him gone. At which I was troubled, and being weary,
went home. And from thence with my wife by water to
Westminster. I to the hall and there met with Coll. Slingsby: so
hearing that the Duke of Yorke is gone down this morning to see
the ship sunk yesterday at Woolwich, he and I returned by his
Coach to the office. And after that to dinner. After dinner he came
to me again and sat with me at my house. And among other
discourse, he told me that it is expected that the Duke will marry the
Lord Chancellor’s daughter at last. Which is likely to be the ruine of
Mr. Davis and my Lord Barkely, who have carried themselfs so
high against the Chancellor — Sir Ch. Barkely swearing that he and
others have lain with her often, which all believe to bea lie. He andI
in the evening to the Coffee-house in Cornhill, the first time that
ever I was there. And I find much pleasure in it through the
diversity of company — and discourse. Home and find my wife at
my Lady Battens, and have made a bargain to go see the ship sunk at
Woolwich, where both the Sir Wms are still, since yesterday. And
I do resolve to go along with them. From thence home and up to
bed — having first been in my study; and to ease my mind did go to
cast up how my cash stands, and I do find, as near as I can, that I
am worth in money clear 240! — for which God be praised.
This afternoon there was a Couple of men with me, with a book
in each of their hands, demanding money for polemony’; and
I over-looked the book and saw myself set down Samuel Pepys,
gent., 10s. for himself and for his servants 2s. Which I did
presently pay without any dispute; but I fear I shall not escape so,
and therefore I have long ago laid by rol: for them; but I think
1. The poll tax.
102
Iam not bound to discover myself.