1660-03-27

Up by 4a-clock, and after I was ready, took my leave of my
father, whom I left in bed; and the same of my Brother John, to
whom I gave tos. Mr. Blayton and I took horse and straight to
Saffron Walden, where at the White Hart we set up our horses and
told the maister of the house to shew us Audly end house; who took
us on foot through the park and so to the house, where the
housekeeper showed us all the house; in which the stateliness of the
ceilings, chimney-pieces, and form of the whole was exceedingly
worth seeing. He took us into the cellar, where we drank most
admirable drink, a health to the King. Here I played on my
Flagelette, there being an excellent Echo. He showed us excellent
pictures; two especially, those of the four Evangelistes and Henry
8th. After that, I gave the man 2s. for his trouble and went back
again. In our going, my landlord carried us through a very old
Hospital or Almeshouse, where 40 poor people was maintained; a
very old foundation, and over the’chimney in the mantelpiece was
an Inscripcion in brass: Orate pro animd Thome Bird &c.; and the
poor’s box also was in the same chimney-piece, with an Iron door
and locks to it, into which I put sixpens: they brought me a draught
of
their drink in a brown bowl, tipped with silver, which I drank of;
and at the bottom was a picture of the Virgen and the Child in her
arms, done in silver. So we went to our Inn, and after eating of
something and kissed the daughter of the house, she being very
pretty, we took leave; and so that night, the road pretty good but
the weather rainy, to Eping. Where we sat and played a game at
22
27 February—2 March 1660
draughts; and after supper and some merry talk with a plain bold
maid of the house, we went to bed.
28. Up in the morning, and had some red Herrings to our
breakfast while my boot-heel was a-mending; by the same token,
the boy left the hole as big as it was before. Then to horse and for
London through the Forrest, where we found the way good, but
only in one path; which we kept as if we had rode through a kennel
all the way.
29. To my office, and drank at Wills with Mr. Moore, who told
me how my Lord is chosen generall-at-sea by the Council and that
it is thought that Monke will be joined with him therein.
—*MARCH#-
1. Tomy office, where little to do; but Mr. Sheply comes to me,
so at dinner time he and I went to Mr. Crews, it being the day that
John, Mr. John Crew’s coachman, was to be buried in the
afternoon, he being a day or two before killed with a blow ofone of
his horses that struck his skull into his brains. From thence Mr.
Sheply and I went into London to Mr. Laxton’s, my Lord’s
Apothecary; and so by water to Westminster, where at the Sun he
and I spent two or three hours at a pint or two of wine, discours-
ing of matters in the country; among other things, telling me that
my Uncle’ did to him make a very kind mention of me and
what he would do for me. Thence I went home, and went to bed
betimes.
2. This morning I went early to my Lord at Mr. Crew’s, where I
spoke to him. Here were a great many too, come to see him, as
Secretary Thurlow who is now by this Parliament chosen again
Secretary of State. There was also gen. Monkes trumpeters to give
my Lord a soundoftheir trumpets this morning. Great is the talk of
a single person, and that it would now be Charles, George, or
Richard again.* Great also is the dispute now in the House in
whose name the writs shall run for the next Parliament — and it is
1. Robert Pepys of Brampton.
2. i.e. Charles Stuart, George Monck, or Richard, son of Oliver Cromwell.
23
said that Mr. Prin in open House said, “In King Charles’s.”’ From
Westminster hall, home. Spent the evening in my study; and so
after talk with my wife, then to bed.