1660-10-25

To the office, where Sir W. Batten, Coll. Slingsby, and I sat a
while; and Sir R. Ford coming to us about some business, we talked
together of the interest of this kingdom to have a peace with Spain
and a war with France and Holland — where Sir R. Ford talked hike a
man of great reason and experience. And afterwards did send for a
Cupp of Tee (a China drink of which Inever had drank before) and
went away. Then came Coll. Birch and Sir R. Browne (by a former
appointment) and with them from Towre wharf in the barge
belonging to our office we went to Deptford to pay off the ship
1. The counties in which the royal dockyards were situated.
8I
1660 25 September—2 October
Successe. At the globe we had a very good dinner, and after that to
the pay again; which being finished, we returned by water again.
AndI from our office by Coach to Westminster to enquire for my
Lord’s coming thither (the King and the Princesse coming up the
River this afternoon as we were at our pay); and I find him gone to
Mr. Crews, where I find him well; only, had got some brush upon
his foot which was not well yet. My Lord told me how the ship that
brought the Princesse and him (the Tredagh) did knock six times
upon the Kentish Knock, which put them in great fear for the ship;
but got off well. From him late, and by Coach home — where the
playsterers being at work in all the rooms in my house, my wife was
fain to make a bed upon the ground for her and I;and so there we lay
all night.
28. office day. All the afternoon at home among my workmen;
work till 10 or 11 at night; and did give them drink and were very
merry with them — it being my luck to meet with a sort of Drolling
workmen upon all occasions. To bed.
29. All day at home to make an end of our dirty work of the
playsterers; and indeed, my Kitchin is now so handsome that I did
not repent of all the trouble that I have been put to to have it done.
This day or yesterday I hear Prince Robt.' is come to Court; but
welcome to nobody.
~+OCTOBER#-
1. Early to my Lord to Whitehall; and there he did give me some
work to do for him and so with all haste to the office. Dined at
home, and my father by chance with me. After dinner he and I
advised about hangings for my rooms, which are now almost fit to
be hung, the painters beginning to do their work today. My layings
out upon my house in Furniture are so great that I fear I shall not be
able to go through them without breaking one of my bags of tool, I
having but 200/ yet in the world.
2. With Sir W. Pen by water to Whitehall — being this morning
1. Rupert.
82
visited before Iwent out by my brother Tom, who told me that for
his lying out-of-doors a day and a night my father hath forbid him
to come any more into his house — at which I was troubled and did
soundly chide him for doing so; and upon confessing his fault, Itold
him I would speak to my father. At Whitehall I met with Capt.
Clerke and took him to the Legg in King streete and did give him a
dish or two of meat, and his purser that was with him, for his old
kindness to me on board. After that at Wills I met with Mr. Spicer;
and with him to the abby to see them at vespers there, where I find
but a thin congregacion allready. So thatI see religion, be it what it
will, is but a humour, and so the esteem of it passeth as other things
do. From thence by Coach to my father’s and discoursed with him
about Tom and did give my advice to take him home again, which I
think he will do in prudence rather then put him upon learning the
way of being worse.