1660-02-03

Drank my morning draught at Harpers and was told there that
the soldiers were all quiet, upon promise of pay. Thence into St.
James’s Park, and walked there to my place for my Flagelette and
there playeda
little, it being a most pleasant morning and sunshine.
Thence to my office, where I paid a little more money to some of
the soldiers under Lieut.- Coll. Miller. About noon Mrs. Turner
came to speak with me and Joyce, and I took them and showed
them the manner of the House’s sitting, the doorkeeper very civilly
opening the door for us. Thence with my Cosen Roger Pepys; it
being term time, we took him out of the Hall to Priors, the Renish
winehouse, and there had a pint or two of wine and a dish of
Anchoves, and bespake three or four dozen of bottles of wine for
him against his Wedding. So we called for nothing more there, but
went and bespoke a shoulder of mutton at Wilkinsons, to be dressed
as well as it could be done, and sent a bottle of wine home to my
house. In the meantime, she and I and Joyce went walking all over
Whitehall, whither Gen. Monke was newly come and we saw all his
forces march by in very good plight and stout officers. Thence to
my house, where we dined; but with a great deal of patience, for the
mutton came in raw and so we were fain to stay the stewing of it. In
the meantime, we sat studying of a posy for a ring for her, which
she is to have at Rog. Pepys his wedding. After dinner I left them
and went to hear news; but only found that the Parliament house
was most of them with [Monck] at Whitehall, and that in his
passage through the town he had many cry to him fora free
Parliament; but little other welcome. I saw in the Palace yard how
unwilling some of the old soldiers were yet to go out of town
without their money; and swore, if they had it not in three days as
they were promised, they would do them more mischief in the
country then if they had stayed here; and that is very likely, the
country being all discontented. The town and guard are already full
of Monkes soldiers. I returned, and it growing dark, I and they
went to take a turn in the park, where Theoph. (who was sent for to
us to dinner) outrun my wife and another poor woman, that laid a
pot of ale with me that she would outrun her. After that, I set them
as far as Charing cross and there left them and my wife; and I went
to see Mrs. Ann, who begun very high about a flock bedI sent her,
but I took her down. Here I played at cards till 9 a-clock. So home
and to bed.