1660-11-29

Lup earely, it being my Lord Mayors day (Sir Rich. Browne);
and neglecting my office, I went to the Wardrobe, where I met my
Lady Sandwich and all the Children. Where after drinking of some
strang and incomparable good Clarett of Mr. Rumballs, he and Mr.
Townsend did take us and set the young Lords at one Mr. Nevills, a
draper in Pauls churchyard; and my Lady and my Lady Pickering
and I to one Mr. Isackson’s, a linendraper at the Key in Cheapside —
where there was a company of fine ladies and we were very civilly
treated and had a very good place to see the pageants; which were
many andI believe good for such kind of things but in themselfs but
poor and absurd. After the ladies were placed, I took Mr.
Townsend and Isackson to the next door, a tavern, and did spend
5s. upon them. The show being done, with much ado we got as far
as Pauls, where I left my Lady in the coach and went on foot with
my Lady Pickering to her lodging, which was a poor one in
Blackfryers, where she never invited me to go in at all with her -
1. William Lilly the astrologer; not to be confused with Lely the painter, whose
name Pepys often spells in the same way.
2. Apparently all astrologers.
89
1660 29 October—1 November
which methought was very strange for her to do. So home, where I
was told how my lady Davis’ was now come to our next lodgings
and hath locked up the leads doore from me, which put me into so
great a disquiet that I went to bed and could not sleep till morning at
it.
30. Within all the morning and dined at home, my mind being so
troubled that I could not mind nor do anything till I speak with the
Comptroller to whom the lodgings belong. In the afternoon, to
ease my mind, I went to the Cockpitt all alone and there saw a very
fine play called The Tamer tamed, very well acted.
31. office day. Much troubled all this morning in my mind about
the business of my walk in the leades. I speak of it to the
Comptroller and the rest of the principall officers, who are all
unwilling to meddle in anything that may anger my Lady Davis;
and so I am fain to give over for the time that she doth continue
therein. Dined at home, and there I have news that Sir W. Pen is
resolved to ride to Sir W. Batten’s country house tomorrow and
would have me to go with him. So! sat up late, getting together my
things to ride in, and was fain to cut a pair of old bootes to make
leathers for those that I was to wear. To bed.
This month I conclude with my mind very heavy for the loss of
the leades —as also for the greatnesse of my late expenses. Insomuch
that I do not think that I have above 150! clear money in the world.
But Ihave, Ibless God, a great deal of good Household stuffe. Ihear
today that the Queen is landed at Dover and will be here on Friday
next the 2 of November. My wife hath been so ill of late of her old
pain that Ihave not known her this fortnight almost, which is a pain
to me.
—% NOVEMBER?-
1. This morning Sir W. Pen and I were mounted earely. And have
very merry discourse all the way, he being very good company. We
came to Sir Wm. Battens, where he lives like a prince, and we were
made very welcome. Among other things, he showed us my Lady’s
1. Wife of John Davis, Navy Office clerk: ‘my lady’ is ironical.
gO
closet, where there was great store of rarities. As also a chaire which
he calls King Harrys chair, where he that sits down is catched with
two irons that come round about him, which makes good sport.
Here dined with us two or three more country gentlemen; among
the rest, Mr. Christmas my old Schoolfellow, with whom I had
much talk. He did remember that I was a great roundhead when I
was a boy, and I was much afeared that he would have remembered
the words that I said the day that the King was beheaded (that were I
to preach upon him, my text should be: ‘““The memory of the
wicked shall rot’); but I found afterward that he did go away from
schoole before that time. He did make us good sport in imitating
Mr. Case, Ash, and Nye, the ministers — which he did very well.
But a deadly drinker he is, and grown exceeding fat.