1660-02-11

This morning I lay long abed; and then to my office where I
read all the morning my Spanish book of Rome. At noon I walked
in the Hall, where I heard the news of a letter from Monke, who
was now gone into the City again and did resolve to stand for the
sudden filling up of the House; and it was very strange how the
countenance of men in the Hall was all changed with joy in half an
1. Dean Colet (d. 1519).
14
11 February 1660
hour’s time. So I went up to the Lobby, where I saw the Speaker
reading of the letter; and after it was read, Sir A. Haslerig came out
very angry. The House presently after rose, and appointed to meet
again at 3 a-clock. I went then down into the Hall, where Imet with
Mr. Chetwind, who had not dined no more then myself; and so we
went towards London, in our way calling at two or three shops, and
could have no dinner; at last, within Temple bar, we found a pullet
ready-roasted, and there we dined. After that, he went to his office
in Chancery lane, calling at the Rolles, where I saw the lawyers
pleading; then to his office, where I sat in his study singing while he
was with his man (Mr. Powells son) looking after his business.
Thence we took coach for the City to Guildhall, where the hall was
full of people expecting Monke and Lord Mayor to come thither,
and all very joyful. Here we stayed a great while; and at last,
meeting witha friend of his, we went to the Three Tun tavern and
drank half a pint of wine; and not liking the wine, we went to an
alehouse, where we met with company of this third man’s
acquaintance and there we dranka little: hence I went alone to
Guildhall to see whether Monke was come yet or no, and met him
coming out of the chamber where he had been with the Mayor and
Aldermen; but such a shout I never heard in all my life, crying out
“God bless your Excellence!” Here I met with Mr. Lock, and took
him to an alehouse and left him there to fetch Chetwind; when we
were come together, Lock told us the substance of the letter that
went from Monke to the Parliament: that he and his officers were
put upon such offices against the City as they could not do with any
content or honour. That there are many members now in the House
that were of the late tyrannical Committee of Safety. That Lambert
and Vane are now in town, contrary to the vote of Parliament. That
therefore he doth desire that all writts for filling up of the House be
issued by Friday next, and that in the meantime he would retire into
the City, only leave them guards for the security of the House and
Council. The occasion of this was the order that he had last night to
go into the City and disarm them and take away their charter;
whereby he and his officers see that the House had a mind to put
them on things that should make them odious; and so it would be in
their power to do what they would with them. He told us that the
Mayor and Aldermen had offered him their own houses for himself
and his officers, and that his soldiers would lack for nothing. And
endeed I saw many people give the soldiers drink and money, and
all along in the streets cried, ‘God bless them!” and extraordinary
1S
good words. In Cheapside there was a great many bonefires, and
Bow bells and all the bells in all the churches as we went home were
a-ringing. Hence we went homewards, it being about ro a-clock.
But the common joy that was everywhere to be seen! The number
of bonefires — there being fourteen between St. Dunstan’s and
Temple bar. And at Strand bridge I could at one view tell 31fires. In
King streete, seven or eight; and all along burning and roasting and
drinking for rumps — there being rumps tied upon sticks and carried
up and down. The buchers at the maypole in the Strand rang a peal
with their knifes when they were going to sacrifice their rump. On
Ludgate hill there was one turning of the spit, that had a rump tied
upon it, and another basting of it. Indeed, it was past imagination,
both the greatness and the suddenness ofit. At one end of the street,
you would think there was a whole lane of fire, and so hot that we
were fain to keep still on the further side merely for heat. Thence
home, and my wife and J went out again to show her the fires; and
after walking as far as the Exchange, we returned and to bed.