1660-02-22

In the morning, entended to have gone to Mr. Crews to
borrow some money; but it raining, I forebore and went to my
Lord’s lodging and look that all things were well there. Then home
and sang a song to my vial; so to my office and to Wills, where Mr.
Pierce found me out and told me that he would go with me to
Cambrige, where Coll. Ayres’s Regiment, to which he is surgeon,
lieth. To my father’s to dinner, where nothing but a small dish of
powdered beef and a dish of carrots, they being all busy to get
things ready for my Brother John to go tomorrow. Hence home to
my study, where I only writ thus much of this day’s passages to this
and so out again. To Whitehall, where I met with Will Simons
and Mr. Mabbott at marshes, who told me how the House had this
day voted that the gates of the City should be set up at the cost of the
State. Home for my lantern and so to my father’s, where I directed
John what books to put [up] for Cambrige.
24-25. I rose very early; and taking horse at Scotland yard at Mr.
Garthwayts stable, I rode to Mr. Pierces — who rose; and in a
Quarter of an hour, leaving his wife in bed (with whom Mr. Lucy
methought was very free as she lay in bed), we both mounted and
so set forth about 7 of the clock, the day and the way very foul.
About Ware we overtook Mr. Blayton, brother-in-law to Dick
Vines, who went thenceforward with us; and at Puckrige we
20
baited. Where we hada
loin of mutton fried and were very merry;
but the way exceeding bad from Ware thither. Then up again and as
far as Foulmer, within six mile of Cambrige, my mare being aJ-aost
tired: here we lay at the Chequer. Playing at cards till supper, which
was a breast of veal roasted. I lay with Mr. Pierce, who we left here
the next morning upon his going to Hinchingbrooke to speak with
my Lord before his going to London; and we two came to
Cambrige by 8 a-clock in the morning, to the Faulcon in the Petty
Cury. Where we found my father and brother very well. After
dressing myself, about 10 a-clock, my father, brother and I to Mr.
Widdrington at Christ’s College, who received us very civilly and
caused my brother to be admitted, while my father, he and I sat
talking. After that done, we take leave. My father and brother went
to visit some friends, Pepys’s, scholars in Cambrige, while I went
to Magdalen College to Mr. Hill, with whom I found Mr. Zanchy,
Burton, and Hollins, and was exceeding civilly received by them; I
took leave, on promise to sup with them, and to my Inn again,
where I dined with some others that were there at an ordinary.
After dinner, my brother to the college and my father and I to my
Cosen Angiers to see them; where Mr. Fairbrother came to us.
Here we sat a while talking. My father, he went to look after his
things at the Carriers and my brother’s chamber, while Mr.
Fairbrother, my Cosen Angier and Mr. Zanchy, who I met at Mr.
- Morton’s shop (where I bought Elenchus Motuum, having given my
former to Mr. Downing when he was here), to the Three tuns,
where we drank pretty hard and many healths to the King &c till it
begin to be darkish; then we broke up andI and Mr. Zanchy went to
Magdalen College, where a very handsome supper at Mr. Hills
chamber, I suppose upon a club among them; where in their
discourse I could find that there was nothing at all left of the old
preciseness in their discourse, specially on Saturday nights. And
Mr. Zanch[y] told me that there was no such thing nowadays
among them at any time. After supper and some discourse, then to
my Inn, where I found my father in his Chamber; and after some
discourse and he well satisfied with this day’s work, we went to
bed, my brother lying with me, his things not being come by the
carrier that he could not lie in the college.