1660-05-04

After this to supper, and then to writingofletters till 12 at night
and so up again at 3 in the morning. My Lord seemed to put great
confidence in me and would take my advice in many things. I
perceive his being willing to do all the Honour in the world to
Monke and to let him have all the Honour of doing the business,
though he will many times express his thoughts of him to be but a
thick-skulled fellow; so that I do believe there is some agreement
40
more then ordinary between the King and my Lord to let Monke
carry on the business, for it is he that must do the business, or at
least that can hinder the business ifhe be not flattered and observed.
This my Lord will hint himself sometimes. I wrote this morning
many letters, and to all the copies of the vote of the council of Warr I
put my name; that ifit should come in print, my name may be atit. I
sent a copy of the vote to. Doling, inclosed in this letter:
“Sir,
He that can fancyafleet (like ours) in her pride, with pendants
loose, guns roaring, caps flying, and the loud Vive le Roy’s
echoed from one ship’s company to another, he and he only can
apprehend the joy this enclosed vote was received with, or the
blessing he thought himself possessed of that bore it, and is
Your humble servant.”
About 9 a-clock I got all my letters done, and sent them by the
messenger that came yesterday. The rest of the afternoon at nine-
pins. In the evening came a packet from London; among the rest, a
letter from my wife which tells me that she hath not been well,
which did exceedingly trouble me; but my Lord sending Mr.
Cooke this night, I wrote to her and sent a piece of gold inclosed to
her, and writ also to Mrs. Bowyer and enclosed a half-piece to her
for a token. After supper at the table in the coach, my Lord talking
concerning the uncertainty of the places of the Exchequer to them
that have them now, he did at last think of an office which doth
belong to him in case the King doth restore every man to his places
that ever have been patent, which is to be one of the clerks of the
Signett,' which will be a fine imployment for one of his sons. After
all this discourse, we broke up and to bed.