1660-05-03

This morning my Lord showed me the King’s declaration and
his letter to the two Generalls to be communicated to the fleet. The
contents of the letter are his offer of grace to all that will come in
within 40 days, only excepting them that the Parliament shall
hereafter except. That the sales of lands during these troubles, and
all other things, shall be left to the Parliament, by which he will
stand. The letter dated at Breda, April; 1660, in the 12th year of
his
Raigne. Upon the receipt of it this morning by an express, Mr.
Phillips, one of the messengers of the Council from Gen. Monke,
my Lord summoned a council of war, and in the meantime did
dictate to me how he would have the vote ordered which he would
have pass this council. Which done, the commanders all came on
board, and the council set in the coach (the first council of war that
hath been in my time), where I read the letter and declaration; and
while they were discoursing upon it, I seemed* to draw up a vote;
which being offered, they passed. Not one man seemed to say no to
it, though I am confident many in their hearts were against it. After
this was done, I went up to the Quarter-deck with my Lord and the
39
commanders, and there read both the papers and the vote; which
done, and demanding their opinion, the seamen did all of them cry
out “God bless King Charles!”’ with the greatest joy imaginable.
That being done, Sir R. Stayner, who had invited us yesterday,
took all the commanders and myself on board him to dinner; where
dinner not being ready, I went with Capt. Hayward to the Plimouth
and Essex, and did what I had to do there and returned, where very
merry at dinner. After dinner, to the rest of the ships (Istayed at the
Assistance to hear the harper a good while) quite through the fleet.
Which was a very brave sight, to visit all the ships and to be received
with the respect and Honour that I was on board them all. And
much more to see the great joy that I brought to all men; not one
through the whole fleet showing the least dislike of the business. In
the evening, as I was going on board the Vice-Admirall, the
Generall begun to fire his guns, which he did all that he had in the
ship; and so did all the rest of the commanders, which was very
gallant, and to hear the bullets go hissing over our heads as we were
in the boat. This done and finished my Proclamation, I returned to
the Nazeby, where my Lord was much pleased to hear how all the
fleet took it; and in a transport ofjoy showed meaprivate letter of
the King’s to him and another from the Duke of Yorke in such
familiar style as to their common friend, with all kindness
imaginable. And I found by the letters, and so my Lord told me too,
that there hath been many letters sped between them for a great
while, and I perceive unknown to Monke. The King speaks of his
being courted to come to The Hague, but doth desire my Lord’s
advice whether to come to take ship. And the Duke offers to learn
the seaman’s tradeof him, in such familiar words as ifJack Cole and
I had writ them. This was very strange to me, that my Lord should
carry all things so wisely and prudently as he doth, and I was over-
joyful to see him in so good condition; and he did nota little please
himself to tell me how he had provided for himself so great a hold in
the King.