1660-03-06

Shrove-tuesday. I called Mr. Sheply and we both went up to my
Lord’s lodgings at Mr. Crew’s, where he bade us to go home again
and get a fire against an hour after — which we did at Whitehall,
whither he came; and after talking with him and Iabout his going to
sea, he called me by myself to go along with him into the garden,
where he asked me how things were with me and what he hath
endeavoured to do with my uncle to get him to do something for
me; but that he would say nothing to. He likewise bade me look out
now, at this turn, some good place; and he would use all his own
and all the interest of his friends that he hath in England to do me
good. And asked me whether I could without too much incon-
venience go to sea as his Secretary, and bade me think of it. He also
begin to talk of thingsofstate, and told me that he should now want
one in that capacity at sea that he might trust in. And therefore he
would have me to go. He told me also that he did believe the King
would come in, and did discourse with me about it and about the
affection of the people and City — at which I was full glad. After he
was gone, I waiting upon him through the garden till he came to the
Hall, I left him and went up to my office, where Mr. Hawly
brought one to me, a seaman that had promised to! to himifhe gat
him a purser’s place, which I think to endeavour to do. While we
were drinking, in comes Mr. Day, a Carpenter in Westminster, to
tell me that it was Shrove-tuesday and that I must go with him to
their yearly club upon this day, which I confess I had quite forgot.
So I went to the Bell, where was Mr.’s Eglin, Veezy, Vincent a
butcher, one more, and Mr. Tanner, with whom I played upon a
viall and he the viallin after dinner, and were very merry, with a
special good dinner — a leg of veal and bacon, two capons and
sausages and fritters, with abundance of wine. This day I hear that
1. Orthodox Anglicanism: his mother appears to have inclined towards Puritanism.
25
the Lords do entend to sit, and great store of them are now in town
and I see in the Hall today. My Lord told me that there was great
endeavours to bring in the Protector’ again; but he told me too,
that he did believe it would not last long if he were brought in; no,
nor the King neither (though he seems to think that he will come
in), unless he carry himself very soberly and well. Everybody now
drink the King’s health without any fear, whereas before it was very
private that a man dare do it. My mind, I must needs remember,
hath been very much eased and joyed in my Lord’s great expression
of kindness this day; and in discourse thereupon, my wife and I lay
awake an hour or two in our bed.