1660-08-10

I hada great deal of pain all night and a great looseness upon
me, so that I could not sleep. In the morning I rose with much pain
and to the office I went and dined at home; and after dinner, with
great pain in my back, I went by water to Whitehall to the Privy
Seale; and that done, with Mr. Moore and Creed to Hideparke by
69
coach and sawafine foot-race, three times round the park, between
an Irishman and Crow that was once my Lord Claypooles footman.
Crow beat the other above two miles. Returned from Hide parke;
I
went to my Lord’s and took Will (who waited for me there) by
coach and went home taking my lute home with me [which] hath
been all this while since Icame from sea at my Lord’s for him to play
on. To bed, in some pain still. For this month or two, it is not
imaginable how busy my head hath been, so that Ihave neglected to
write letters to my Uncle Robt. in answer to many of his, and to
other friends; nor endeed have Idone anything as to my own family;
and especially this month, my waiting at the Privy Seale makes me
much more unable to think of anything, because of my constant
attendance there after I have done at the Navy Office. But blessed be
God for my good chance of the Privy Seale; where Iget every day, I
believe, about 3/ per diem. This place I got by chance and my Lord
did give it me by chance, neither he nor I thinking it to be of the
worth that he and Ifind it to be. Never since Iwas a man in the world
was I ever so great a stranger to public affairs as now I am, having
not read a newsbook or anything like it, or enquired after any news,
or what the Parliament doth or in any wise how things go. Many
people look after my house in axe yard to hire it of me, so that lam
troubled with them; and I have a mind to get the money to buy
goods for my house at the Navy Office, and yet I am loath to put it
off, because that Mr. Man bids me 1ooo0l for my office, which is so
great a sum that I am loath to settle myself at my new house, lest I
should take Mr. Man’s offer in case I find my Lord willing to it.