1660-04-25

About 2 a-clock in the morning, letters came from London by
our Coxon; so they waked me, but Iwould not rise but bid him stay
till morning, which he did; and then I rose and carried them in to
my Lord, who read them a-bed. Among the rest, there was the
Writt and Mandate for him to dispose to the Cinque Ports for
choice of Parliament men. There was also one for me from Mr.
Blackburne, who with his own hand superscribes it to S.P. Esqr., of
which, God knows, I was not alittle proud. About 10 a-clock Mr.
Ibbotts at the end of the long table begin to pray and preach and
endeed made a very good sermon, upon the duty of a Christian to
be steadfast in the faith. After that, the Captain, Cuttance, and I
have oysters, my Lord being in his Cabbin, not entending to stir out
today. After that, up into the great Cabbin above to dinner with the
Captain, where was Capt. Isham and all the officers of the ship. I
took place of all but the Captain. After dinner I writ a great many
letters to my friends at London; and after that, the sermon begin
again, all which time I slept, God forgive me. After that, it being a
fair day, I walked with the Captain upon the Deck talking. At night
I supped with him and after that had orders from my Lord about
some business to be done against tomorrow, which I
sat up late and
did; and then to bed.
31
1660 26 March-1 April
26. This day it is two years since it pleased God that I was cut of
the stone at Mrs. Turner’s in Salisbury court. And did resolve while
I live to keep it a festival, as I did the last year at my house, and for
ever to have Mrs. Turner and her company with me. But now it
pleases God that I am where I am and so am prevented to do it
openly; only, within my soul I can and do rejoice and bless God,
being at this time, blessed be His holy name, in as good health as
ever I was in my life. This morning I ris early and went about
making of an establishment of the whole fleet andalist of all the
ships, with the number of men [and] guns: about an hour after that,
we had a meeting of the principal commanders and seamen to
proportion out the number of these things. After that to dinner,
there being very many commanders on board. All the afternoon
very many orders were made, till ] was very weary. At night Mr.
Sheply and W. Howe came and brought some bottles of wine and
something to eat at my Cabbin, where we were very merry,
remembering the day of being cut of the stone. The Captain,
Cuttance, came afterwards and sat drinking a bottle of wine till 11
a-clock at night, which is a kindness he doth not usually do to the
greatest officer in the ship. After that to bed.
29. We lie still a little below Gravesend. At night Mr. Sheply
returned from London and told us of several elections for the next
Parliament. That the King’s Effigies was new-making, to be set up
in the Exchange again.
30. Iwas saluted in the morning with two letters from some that I
had done a favour to, which brought me in eacha piece of gold.
This day, while my Lord and we were at dinner, the Nazeby came in
sight toward us, and at last came to Anchor close by us. After
dinner my Lord and many others went on board her, where
everything was out of order; and anew chimney made for my Lord
in his bedchamber, which he was much pleased with.
—+APRILL2-
1. Lords day. Mr. Ibbott preached very well. After dinner my
Lord did give me aprivate list of all the ships that were to be set out
this summer, wherein I do discern that he hath made it his care to
32
put by as much of the Anabaptists as he can. By reason of my Lord
and my being busy to send away the Packet by Mr. Cooke of the
Nazeby, it was 4 a-clock before we could begin sermon again. This
day Capt. Guy came on board from Dunkirke, who tells me that
the King will come in and that the soldiers at Dunkirke do drink the
King’s health in the streets. At night the Captain, Sir R. Stayner,
Mr. Sheply, and I did sup together in the Captain’s cabin. I made a
commission tonight to Capt. Wilgress of the Beare, which got me
30s. So after writing a while, I went to bed.