1660-02-21

Inthe morning, going out, Isaw many soldiers going toward
Westminster; and was tol[d] that they were going to admit the
secluded members again. So Ito Westminster hall, and in Chancery
row I saw about 20 of them, who had been at Whitehall with gen.
Monke, who came thither this morning and made a speech to them
and recommended to them a commonwealth, and against Ch.
Stuart. They came to the House and went in one after another, and
at last the Speaker came. But it is very strange that this could be
carried so private, that the other members of the House heard
nothing of all this till they found them in the House, insomuch that
the soldiers that stood there to let in the secluded members, they
took for such as they had ordered to stand there to hinder their
coming in. Mr. Prin came with an old basket-hilt sword on, and
had a great many great shouts upon his going into the hall. They sat
till noon, and at their coming out Mr. Crew saw me and bid me
19
come to his house; which I did, and he would have me dine with
him, which I did, and he very joyful; told me that the House had
made Gen. Monke generall of all the forces in England, Scotland,
and Ireland. He advised me to send for my Lord forthwith, and told
me that there is no Question but, if he will, he may now be
imployed again; and that the House doth entend to do nothing
more then to issue writs and to settle a foundation for a free
parliament. After dinner I back to Westminster hall with him in his
coach. Here I met with Mr. Lock and Pursell, Maisters of Musique;
and with them to the Coffee-house into a room next the Water by
ourselfs. Here we had variety of brave Italian and Spanish songs and
a Canon for 8 Voc:, which Mr. Lock had newly made on these
words: Domine salvum fac Regem, an admirable thing. Here, out of
the window it was a most pleasant sight to see the City from [one]
end to the other with a glory about it, so high was the light of the
Bonefires and so thick round the City, and the bells rang
everywhere.