1660-05-13

Lords day. Trimmed in the morning; after that to the Cooke-
room with Mr. Sheply, the first time that I was there this voyage.
Then to the Quarter-Deck, upon which the taylors and painters
were at work cutting out of some pieces of yellow cloth into the
fashion of a crown and C.R. and put it upon afine sheet, and that
into the flag instead of the State’s arms; which, after dinner, was
finished and set up —after it had been showed to my Lord, who took
physic today and was in his chamber; and liked it so well as to bid
me give the tailors 20s. among them for doing it. Mr Cooke came
after us in the Yarmouth, bringing me a letter from my wife and a
Latin letter from my brother Jo:, with both which I was exceed-
ingly pleased. No sermon all day, we being under sail; only at
night, prayers, wherein Mr. Ibbott prayed for all that were related
to us in a spiritual and fleshly way.
14-15. Inthe morning, when I waked and rose, I saw myself out
of the Scuttle close by the shore, which afterwards I was told to be
the Duch shore. The Hague was clearly to be seen by us. My Lord
went up in his night gowne into the Cuddy to see how to dispose
thereof for himself and us that belong to him, to give order for our
removall today. Some masty Duchmen came on board to proffer
their boats to carry things from us on shore &c., to get money by
us. Before noon, some gentlemen came on board from the shore to
kiss my Lords hands. And by and by Mr. North and Dr. Clerke
went to kiss the Queen of Bohemia’s hands from my Lord, with a
dozen of attendants from on board to wait on them; among which I
sent my boy — who, like myself, is with child to see any strange
thing. After noon they came back again, having kissed the Queen of
43
Bohemia’s hand, and was sent again by my Lord to do the same to
the Prince of Orange. SoI got the Captain to ask leave for me to go,
which my Lord did give; and I, taking my boy and Judge-Advocate
[Fowler] with me, went in company with them. The weather bad;
we were soundly washed when we came near the shore, it being
very hard to land there. The shore is, as all the country between that
and The Hague, all sand. The rest of the company got a coach by
themselfs. Mr. Creed and I went in the fore-part of a coach,
wherein there was two very pretty ladies, very fashionable and with
black paches, who very merrily sang all the way and that very well.
And were very free to kiss the two blades that were with them. I
took out my Flagelette and piped, but in piping Idropped my rapier
stick; but when I came to The Hague, Isent my boy back again for it
and he found it, for which I gave him 6d., but some horse had gone
over it and broke the scabbard. The Hague is a most neat place in all
respects. Here we walked up and down agreat while, the town
being now very full of Englishmen.
But going to see the Prince, he was gone forth with his Governor;
and so we walked up and down the town and Court to see the place;
and by the help of a stranger, an Englishman, we saw a great many
places and were made to understand many things, as the intention
of the Maypoles which we saw there standing at every great man’s
door, of different greatness according to the Quality of the person.
About ro at night the Prince comes home, and we found an easy
admission. His attendance very inconsiderable as for a prince. But
yet handsome, and his tutor a fine man and himself a very pretty
boy. It was bright Mooneshine tonight. This done, we went to a
place we had taken up to sup in — where a sallet and two or three
bones of mutton were provided for a matter of ten of us, which was
very strange. After supper the Judge and I to another house to bed,
leaving them there; and he and Ilying together in one of their press-
beds, there being two more in the same room, but all very neat and
handsome; and my boy sleeping upon a bench by me, we lay till
past 3 a-clock; and then rise and up and down the town to see it by
daylight. Where we saw soldiers of the Prince’s guard, all very fine,
and the Burgers of the town with their arms and musquets as bright
as silver; I meeting this morning a Schoole-Master that spoke good
English and French, he went along with us and showed us the
whole town. And indeed, I cannot speak enough of the gallantry of
the town. Everybody of fashion speak French or Latin, or both.
The women, many of them very pretty and in good habitt,
44
fashionable, and black spots. He went with me to buy a couple of
basketts, one of them for Mrs. Pierce, the other for my wife. After
he was gone (we having first drank with him at our lodging), the
Judge and I go the grand Salle, where we were showed the place
where the States-generall sit in council. The hall is a great place,
where the flags that they take from their enemies are all hung up.
And things to be sold, as in Westminster hall, and not much unlike
it but that not being so big — but much neater. After this to a
bookseller’s and bought, for the love of the binding, three books —
the French Psalms in four parts, Bacon’s organon and Farnaby’s
Rhetoric.
Coming on board, we found all the Commissioners of the House
of Lords at dinner with my Lord; who after dinner went away for
shore. In the afternoon my Lord called me on purpose to show me
his fine clothes which are now come hither; and indeed, are very
rich—as gold and silver can make them. Only his sword he and I do
not like. In the afternoon my Lord and I walked together in the
Coach two houres, talking together upon all sorts of discourse — as
Religion, wherein he is I perceive wholly Scepticall, as well as I,
saying that indeed the Protestants as to the Church of Rome are
wholly fanatiques. He likes uniformity and form of prayer.