1660-02-29

In the morning I went to Mr. Guning’s, where he made an
excellent sermon upon the 2 of the Galatians, about the difference
that fell between St. Paul and Peter (the feast-day of St. Paul being
but a day or two ago); whereby he did prove that contrary to the
doctrine of the Roman Church, St. Paul did never own any
dependence or that he was inferior to St. Peter, but that they were
equal; only, one a perticular charge of preaching to the Jews and the
other to the Gentiles. Here I met with Mr. Moore and went home
with him to dinner to Mr. Crews, where Mr. Spurrier being in
town did dine with us. From thence I went home and spent the
afternoon in casting up of my accounts; and do find myself to be
worth 4ol and more, which] did not think, but am afraid that I have
forgot something.
1. An eating-house.
IO
30 January—2 February 1660
30. This morning, before I was up, I fell a-singing of my song
Great, good, and just, &c. and put myself thereby in mind that this
was the fatal day, now ten year since, his Majesty died. There seems
now to be a general cease of talk, it being taken for granted that
Monke doth resolve to stand to the Parliament and nothing else. I
spent a little time this night in knocking up nails for my hats and
cloaks in my chamber.
-~%FEBRUARY#-
1. To Mrs. Jem: and spoke with Madam Scott and her husband,
who did promise to have her thing for her neck done this week.
Thence home and took Gammer East and James the porter, a
soldier, to my Lord’s lodgings— who told me how they were drawn
into the field today, and that they were ordered to march away
tomorrow to make room for Gen. Monke. But they did shout their
Collonell (Coll. Fich) and the rest of the officers out of the field, and
swore they would not go without their money; and that if they
would not give it them, they would go where they might have it,
and that was the City. Here I took some bedding to send to Mrs.
Ann for her to lie in now she hath her fits of the ague. Thence I went
to Wills, and stayed like a fool there and played at cards till 9 a-clock
and so came home — where I found Mr. Hunt and his wife, who
stayed and sat with me till 10; and so good-night.
2. Our waterman, White, told us how the watermen have lately
been abused by some that havea desire to get in to be watermen to
the State, and have lately presented an address of 9 or 10000 hands to
stand by this Parliament; when it was only told them that it was toa
petition against Hackny coaches. And that today they have put out
another to undeceive the world and to clear themselfs; and that
among the rest, Cropp, my waterman and one of great practice,
was one that did cheat them thus. James, the soldier, came; who
told us how they had been all day and night upon their guard at St.
James’s and that through the whole town they did resolve to stand
to what they had began, and that tomorrow he did believe they
would go into the City and be received there.
1. Jemima Mountagu, daughter of ‘my Lord’, suffered from a malformation of
the neck which was being treated by Scott.
II