1661-11-30

All the morning at the office. At noon played on my Theorbo
and much pleased therewith — as it is now altered with a new neck.
In the afternoon Capt. Lambert called me out by appointment and
we walked together to Deptford; and there in his ship the Norwich I
got him to show me every hole and corner of the ship, much to my
informacion and the purpose of my going. At my coming home, I
am sorry to find my wife displeased with her maid Doll:, whose
fault is that she cannot keep her peace, but will alway be talking in
an angry manner, though it be without any reason and to no
purpose. Which I am sorry for — and do see the inconvenience that
161
1661 30 October—4 November
doth attend the increase of a man’s fortune, by being forced to keep
more servants, which brings trouble.
-%NOVEMBER#-
2. At the office all the morning; where Sir John Minnes our new
Comptroller was fetched by Sir Wm. Pen and myself from Sir W.
Battens and led to his place in the office — the first time that he hath
come hither. And he seems a good fair-condition[ed] man and one
that Iam glad hath the office. This night my boy Wainman, as Iwas
in my chamber, [I] overheard him let off some Gunpouder; and
hearing my wife chide him below for it, anda noise made, Icall him
up and find that it was powder that he had put in his pocket, and a
mach carelessely with it, thinking that it was out; and so the match
did give fire to the powder and had burned his side and his hand,
that he put into his pocket to put out the fire. But upon
examination, and finding him in a lie about the time and place that
he bought it, I did extremely beat him. And though it did trouble
me to do it, yet I thought it necessary to do it. So to write by the
post, and to bed.
3. Lords day. This day I stirred not out, but took physique and it
did work very well; and all the day, as I was at leisure, I did read in
Fuller’s Holy Warr (which Ihave of late bought) and did try to make
a Song in the prayse of a Liberall genius (as I take my own to be) to
all studies and pleasures; but it not proving to my mind, I did reject
it and so proceeded not in it. At night my wife and I had a good
supper by ourselfs, of a pullet hashed; which pleased me much to
see my condition come to allow ourselfs a dish like that. And so at
night to bed.
4. Inthe morning, being very rainy, by Coach with Sir W. Penn
and my wife to Whitehall; and sent her to Mrs. Hunts, and he and I
to Mr. Coventry about business; and so sent for her again, and all
three home again; only, I to the Miter (Mr. Rawlinson’s), where
Mr. Pierce the purser had got us a most rare Chine of beef and a dish
of marrow bones. Our Company, my Uncle Wight, Capt.
Lambert, one Capt. Doves, and purser Barber, Mr. Rawlinson,
and ourselfs — and very merry. After dinner I took Coach and called
162
my wife at my brother’s, where I left her; and to the Opera, where
we saw The Bondman, which of old we both did so doate on, and do
so still; though, to both our thinking, not so well acted here (having
too great expectacions) as formerly at Salsbury Court — but for
Baterton; he is called by us both the best actor in the world. So
home by coach, I lighting by the way at my uncle Wights and
stayed therea little, and so home after my wife. And to bed.