1661-03-28

This month ends with two great Secrets under dispute, but
yet known to very few. First, who the King will marry. And what
the meaning of this fleet is which we are now sheathing to set out for
1. Of recommendation.
2. The Shrove-Tuesday custom of throwing sticks at a bird tethered by its leg.
I2I
1661 28 February—8 March
the Southward. Most think against Argier against the Turke, or to
the East Indys against the Dutch — who we hear are setting out a
great fleet thither.’
—% MARCH2-
1. To Whitefryers and saw The Bondman acted — an excellent play
and well done — but above all that ever I saw, Baterton doth the
Bondman the best. Then to my father’s and find my mother ill.
After staying a while with them, then I went home—and sat up late,
spending my thoughts how to get money to bear me out in my
great expense at the Coronacion, against which all provide — and
Scaffolds setting up in every street. I have many designs in my head
to get some, but know not which will take. To bed.
4. My Lord went this morning on his journy to Hinchingbrooke,
Mr. Packer with him; the chief business being to look over and
determine how and in what manner his great work of building?
shall be done.
7. This morning Sir Wms both went to Woolwich to sell some
old provisions there. I to Whitehall and up and down about many
businesses. Dined at my Lord’s. Then to Mr. Crew to Mr. Moore
and he and I to London to Guildhall to see the seamen paid off; but
could not without trouble. And so I took him to the Fleece tavern,
where the pretty woman that Luellin lately told me the story of
dwells; but I could not see her. Then towards home; and met
Spicer, D. Vines, Ruddiard and a company more of my old
acquaintances and went intoa place to drink some ale; and there we
stayed playing the fools till late; and so I home.
8. All the morning at the office. At noon Sir W. Batten, Coll.
Slingsby and I by coach to the tower, to Sir John Robinsons, to
dinner. Where great good cheer. High company; among others, the
Duchess of Albemerle, who is even a plain, homely dowdy. I was
much contented to ride in such state into the towre and be received
1. The English fleet in fact went in june to Algiers and Portugal.
2. Hinchingbrooke was now partially rebuilt and the garden redesigned.
I22
among such high company — while Mr. Mount, my Lady
Duchesses gentleman-usher, stood waiting at table, whom I ever
thought a man so much above me in all respects. Also, to hear the
discourse of so many high Cavaleers of things past — it was of great
content and joy to me.