1661-06-29

Kings birth day. Rose earely; and having made myself fine and
put six spoons anda porringer of Silver in my pocket to give away
today, Sir W. Pen and I took Coach and (the weather and ways
being foule) went to Waltamstowe. And being come thither, heard
Mr. Ratcliffe (my former schoolefellow at Pauls, who is yet a mere
boy) preach upon “‘Nay, lett him take all, since my Lord the King is
1. The customary procession of boys perambulating the parish bounds on
Ascension Day.
136
29 May-1 June 1661
returned,” &c: he reads all, and his sermon very simple* — but I
looked for no better. Back to dinner to Sir Wms; and then after a
walk in the fine gardens, we went to Mrs. Brown’s,! where Sir W.
Pen and I were godfathers and Mrs. Jordan and Shipman god-
mothers to her boy. And there, before and after the Christening, we
were with the women above in her chamber; but whether we
carried ourselfs well or ill, |know not — but Iwas directed by young
Mrs. Batten. One passage, of a lady that eate wafers with her dog,
dida little displease me. I did give the midwife 10s. and the nurse $s.
and the maid of the house 2: but for as much as Iexpected to give the
name to the Childe, but did not, it being called John, I forbore then
to give my plate — till another time, after a little more advice. All
being done, we went to Mrs. Shipmans, who is a great butter-
woman; and I did see there the most of milke and cream, and the
cleanest, that ever I saw in my life. After we had filled our bellies
with cream, we took our leaves and away. In our way we had great
sport to try who should drive fastest, Sir W. Batten’s coach or Sir
W. Pen’s charriot, they having four and we two horses, and we beat
them. But it cost me the spoiling of my clothes and velvet coate
with dirt. Being come home, I to bed; and gave my breeches to be f
dried by the fire against tomorrow.
30. This day I hear the parliament hath ordered a bill to be
brought in for the restoring the Bishops to the House of Lords —
which they had not done so soon but to spite Mr. Prynne, who is
every day so bitter against them in his discourse in the House.
—#JUNE-
1. Saturday. Having taken our leaves of Sir W. Batten and my
Lady, who are gone this morning to Chatham to keep their
Whitsuntide, Sir W. Penn and I and Mr. Gauden by water to
Woolwich; and there went from ship to ship to give order for and
take notice of their forwardness to go forth. And then to Deptford
and did the like — having dined at Woolwich with Capt. Poole at the
taverne there. From Deptford we walked to Redriffe, calling at the
Halfway house; and there came into a room where there was
1. Batten’s sister.
137
infinite of new cakes placed, that are made against Whitsuntide; and
there we were very merry. By water home and there did businesses
of the office. Among others, got my Lord’s imprest of 100ol and
Mr. Creeds of 10000! against this voyage, their bills signed. Having
writ letters into the country and read something, I went to bed.