1661-02-29

Mr. Moore making up accounts with me all this morning till
Lieut. Lambert came; and so with them over the water to
Southwark and so over the fields to Lambeth, and there drank —it
being a most glorious and warm day, even to amazement, for this
time of the year. Thence to my Lord’s, where we find my Lady
II4
29 January—1 February 1661
gone with some company to see Hampton Court; so we three went
to [Whitefriars] (the first time that ever I was there since plays
begun);' and there, after great patience and little expectacions from
so poor beginnings, Isaw three acts of The Mayd in the Mill acted, to
my great content. But it being late, I left the play and them, and by
water through bridge home. And so to Mr. Turner’s house, where
the Comptroller, Sir Wm. Baten, and Mr. Davis and their ladies;
and here we have a most neat little, but costly and genteele supper.
And after that, a great deal of impertinent mirth by Mr. Davis and
some catches, and so broke up. And going away, Mr. Davis’s eldest
son took up my old Lady Slingsby in his armes and carried her to
the Coach, and is said to be able to carry three [of] the biggest men
that were in the company — which Iwonder at. So home and to bed.
30th. Fast day. The first time that this day hath been yet observed.
And Mr. Mills made a most excellent sermon — upon “Lord,
forgive us our former iniquitys.” Speaking excellently of the justice
of God in punishing man for the sins of his ancesters. Home, and
John Goods comes; and after dinner Sir Wm. Pen and Iinto Moore-
fields and have a rare walk, it being a most pleasant day. And
besides much discourse, did please ourselfs to see young Davis and
Whitton, two of our clerks, going by us in the field - who we
observe to take much pleasure together; and I did most often see
them at plays together. I went away home, and there understand
that my mother is come home well from Brampton. And have a
letter from my brother John — a very ingenious one; and he therein
begs to have leave to come to town at the Coronacion. Then to my
Lady Batten’s, where my wife and she are lately come back again
from being abroad and seeing of Cromwell, Ireton, and Bradshaw
hanged and buried at Tiburne. Then I home.
~+FEBRUARY4#-
1. Friday. A full office all this morning; and busy about answering
the Comissioners of Parliament’ to their letter, wherein they desire
to borrow two Clerkes of ours — which we will not grant them.
1. Cf. above, p. 109, n. I.
2. Appointed to pay off ships.
II§