1661-07-07

Lords day. Inthe morning my father and I walked in the garden
and read the Will; where though he gives me nothing at present till
my father’s death, or at least very little, yet 1am glad to see that he
hath done so well for us all — and well to the rest of his kindred.
After that done, we went about getting things, as ribbands and
gloves, ready for the burial. Which in the afternoon was done;
where it being Sonday, all people far and near came in and in the
greatest disorder that ever I saw; we made shift to serve them what
we had of wine and other things; and then to carry him to the
church, where Mr. Taylor buried him and Mr. Turner preached a
funerall Sermon — where he spoke not perticularly of him anything,
but that he was one so well-known for his honesty, that it spoke for
itself above all that he could say for it. And so made a very good
sermon. Home with some of the company who supped there; and
things being quiet, at night to bed.
8-13. I fell to work, and my father, to look over his papers and
clothes. And continued all this week upon that business — much
troubled with my aunts base ugly humours. We had new of Tom
Trices' putting in a caveat against us in behalfe of his mother, to
whom my Uncle hath not given anything, and for good reason
1. Stepson of Robert Pepys.
144
therein expressed; which troubled us also. But above all, our
trouble is to find that his estate appears nothing as we expected and
all the world believes. Nor his papers so well sorted as I would have
had them, but all in confusion, that break my brains to understand
them. We missed also the Surrenders of his Coppyhold land,
without which the land could not come to us but to the heire-at-
law.! So that what with this and the badness of the drink and the ill
opinion I have of the meat, and the biting of the gnatts by night —
and my disappointment in getting home this week — and the trouble
of sorting all the papers, I am almost out of my wits with trouble.
Only, I appear the more contented, because I would not have my
father troubled.