1661-01-07

This morning news was brought to me to my bedside that
there hath beena great stirr in the City this night by the Fanatiques,
who have been up and killed six or seven men, but all are fled. My
Lord Mayor and the whole City have been in armes, above 40000.°
To the office; and after that to dinner, where my brother Tom came
and dined with me; and after dinner (leaveing 12d. with my servants
to buy acake with at night, this day being kept as Twelfeday), Tom
and I and my wife to the Theatre and there saw The Silent Woman,
the first time that ever I did see it and it is an excellent play. Among
other things here, Kinaston the boy hath the good turn to appear in
three shapes: I, as a poor woman in ordinary clothes to please
Morose; then in fine clothes as a gallant, and in them was clearly the
prettiest woman in the whole house — and lastly, as a man; and then
likewise did appear the handsomest man in the house. From thence
by link to my Cosen Stradwickes, where my father and we and Dr.
Pepys, Scott and his wife, and one Mr. Ward and his. And after a
good supper we have an excellent cake, where the mark for the
Queene was cut; and so there was two queenes, my wife and Mrs.
Ward; and the King being lost, they chose the Doctor to be King, so
we made him send for some wine; and then home: and in our way
were in many places strictly examined, more then in the worst of
times, there being great fears of these fanatiques rising again. For
the present I do not hear that any of them are taken.
g. waked in the morning about 6 a-clock by people running up
1. Public performances of plays had been forbidden under the Puritans.
2. The Fifth-Monarchists’, or Venner’s, rising.
3. 2 aslip for 4000.
109
and down in Mr. Davis’s house, talking that the Fanatiques were up
in armes in the City, and soI rise and went forth, where in the street
Ifind everybody in arms at the doors; so Ireturned (though with no
good courage at all, but that I might not seem to be afeared) and got
my sword and pistol, which however I have no powder to charge,
and went to the door, where I found Sir R. Ford; and with him I
walked up and down as far as the Exchange, and there I left him. In
our way, the streets full of trainebands, and great stories what
mischief these rogues have done; and Ithink near a dozen have been
killed this morning on both sides. Seeing the city in this condition,
the shops shut and all things in trouble, I went home and sat, it
being office day, till noon. So home and dined at home, my father
with me. And after dinner he would needs have me go to my uncle
Wights (where I have been so long absent that Iam ashamed to go):
I found him at home and his wife; I can see they have taken my
absence ill, but all things are past and we good friends; and here I sat
with my aunt till it was late, my uncle going forth about business —
my aunt being very fearful to be alone. So home to my lute till late,
and then to bed — there being strict guards all night in the City,
though most of the enemy they say are killed or taken.