1661-05-19

Lords day. To my Lord’s, where we went and sat talking and
laughing in the drawing-room a great while. All our talk about
their going to sea this voyage,’ which Capt. Ferrers is in some
doubt whether he shall go or no. But swears that he would go ifhe
were sure never to come back again. And I giving him some hopes,
he grew so mad with joy that he fell a-dancing and leaping like a
madman. Now it fell out so that the balcone windows were open;
and he went to the rayle and made an offer to leap over and asked
what ifhe should leap over there. I told him I would give him 4ol if
he did not go to sea. With that, though Ishut the door and W. Howe
hindered him all we could, yet he opened them again and with a
vault leaps down into the garden — the greatest and most desperate
frolic that ever I saw in my life. I run to see what was become of
him, and we find him crawled upon his knees — but could not rise.
So we went down into the garden and dragged him to the bench,
where he looked like a dead man — but could not stir. And though he
1. See above, p. 122, n. I.
134
had broke nothing, yet his pain in his back was such as he could not
endure. With this, my Lord (who was in the little new room) came
to us in an amaze and bid us carry him up; which by our strength we
did and so laid him in Easts bed by the doore— where he lay in great
pain. We sent for Doctor and Chyrurgeon, but none to be found;
till by and by, by chance comes in Dr. Clerke — who is afeared of
him. So we sent to get a lodgeing for him; and I went up to my
Lord, where Capt. Cooke, Mr. Gibbons, and others of the King’s
Musique were come to present my Lord with some songs and
Symphonys, which were performed very finely; which being done,
Itook leave and supped at my father’s — where was my Cozen Beck,
come lately out of the country. I am troubled to see my father so
much decay of a suddaine as he doth, both in his seeing and hearing
— and as much, to hear of him how my Brother Tom doth grow
disrespectfull to him and my mother. I took leave and went home.
Where to prayers (which I have not had in my house a good while),
and so to bed.