1661-09-31

At home and the office all the morning; and at noon comes
Luellin to me and he and I to the taverne, and after that to
Bartlemew faire; and there, upon his motion, to a pitiful alehouse,
where we hada dirty slut or two come up that were whores; but my
very heart went against them, so that I took no pleasure but a great
deal of trouble at being there and getting from thence, for fear of
being seen. From thence he and I walked toward Ludgate and
parted. Iback again to the fair all alone and there met with my ladies
Jemimah and Paulina, with Mr. Pickering and Madamoiselle,' at
seeing the Monkys dance, which was much to see what they could
be brought to do; but it troubled me to sit among such nasty
company. After that, with them into Christs: Hospitall, and there
Mr. Pickering bought them some fairings, and I did give every of
them a bauble, which was the little globes of glass with things
1. Mlle le Blanc, the young ladies’ governess.
150
31 August—8 September 1661
hanging in them, which pleased the ladies very well.
Thus ends the month. My mayde Jane newly gone, and Pall left
now to do all the work till another mayde comes; which shall not be
till she goes away into the country with my mother. Myself and
wife in good health. My Lord Sandwich in the Straits and newly
recovered of a great sickness at Alicante. My father gone to settle at
Brampton. And myself under much business and trouble for to
settle things in the estate to our content. But which is worst, I find
myself lately too much given to seeing of plays and expense and
pleasure, which makes me forget my business, which I must labour
to amend. No money comes in, so that I have been forced to
borrow a great deal of money for my own expenses and to furnish
my father, to leave things in order. I have some trouble about my
Brother Tom, who is now left to keep my father’s trade, in which I
have great fears that he will miscarry — for want of brains and care.
at Court things are in very ill condition, there being so much
zmulacion, poverty, and the vices of swearing, drinking, and
whoring, that I know not what will be the end of it but confusion.
And the Clergy so high, that all people that I meet with, all do
protest against their practice. In short, I see no content or
satisfaccion anywhere in any one sort of people. The season very
sickly everywhere of strange and fatall feavers.
~%SEPTEMBER#-
5. To the Privy Seale this morning about business — in my way
taking leave of my mother, who goes to Brampton today. But
doing my business at the Privy Seale pretty soon, I took boat and
went to my uncle Fenners; and there I find my mother and my wife
and Pall (of whom I had this morning at my own house taken leave,
and given her 20s. and good counsel how to carry herself to my
father and mother); and so I took them, it being late, to Beards,
where they were stayed for; and so I put them into the Waggon and
saw them going presently — Pall crying exceedingly. My wife and I
to the fair, and I showed her the Italian dancing the ropes and the
women that do strange tumbling tricks. And so by foot home.
8. Lords day. To church, it being a very wet night last night and
today. Dined at home. And so to church again with my wife in the
I§I
afternoon. And coming home again, find our new mayde Doll
asleep that she could not hear to let us in, so that we were fain to
send the boy in at a window to open the door to us. So up to my
chamber all alone. And troubled in mind to think how much of late
I have addicted myself to expense and pleasure, that now I can
hardly reclaime myself to look after my great business of settling
Gravely business,! till it is now almost too late. I pray God give
me grace to begin now to look after my business; but it always was,
and I fear will ever be, my foible, that after I am once got
behindhand with business, I am hard to set to it again to recover it.
In the evening I begun to look over my accounts; and upon the
whole, I do find myself, by what I can yet see, worth near 6001; for
which God be blessed — which put me into great comfort. So to
supper and bed.