1661-07-28

Athomeall the morning, practising to sing, which is now my
great trade. And at noon to my Lady and dined with her. So back
and to the office. And there sat till 7 at night; and then Sir W. Penn
in his coach and I, we went to Moorefields and there walked; and
stood and saw the wrestling, which Inever saw so much of before —
between the North and West countrymen. So home; and this night
142
28 June—2 July 1661
had our bed set up in our room that we called the Nursery, where
we lay; and I am very much pleased with the room.
30. Lords day. After dinner, Sir Wms both and I by water to
Whitehall; where having walked up and down, at last met with the
Duke of Yorke according to an order sent us yesterday from him, to
give him an account where the fault lay in the not sending out of the
ships. Which we find to be only the wind hath been against them,
and so they could not get out of the River. Hence I to Grayes Inn
walk all alone; and with great pleasure seeing the fine ladies walk
there—myself humming to myself (which nowadays is my constant
practice since I begun to learn to sing) the trillo; and find by use that
it doth come upon me. Home, very weary, and to bed
— finding my
wife not sick but yet out of order, that Ifear she will come to be sick.
This day the Portuguese Embassador came to Whitehall to take
leave of the King, he being now going to end all with the Queene
and to send her over.
The weather now very fair and pleasant, but very hot. My father
gone to Brampton to see my Uncle Robt., not knowing whether to
find him dead or alive. Myself, lately under a great expense of
money upon myself in clothes and other things; but I hope tomake
it up this summer, by my having to do in getting things ready to
send with the next fleet for the Queene. Myself in good health; but
mighty apt to take cold, so that this hot weather I am fain to wear a
cloth before my belly.
—% JULY%-
2. To Westminster hall and there walked up and down, it being
term-time. Spoke with several; among others, my Cosen Rogr.
Pepys, who was going up to the parliament-house and enquired
whether I had heard from my father since he went to Brampton —
which I had done yesterday, who writes that my uncle is by fits
stupid and like a man that is drunk, and sometimes speechless.
Home; and after my singing master had done and took Coach and
went to Sir Wm. Davenant’s opera —this being the fourth day that it
hath begun, and the first that I have seen it. Today was acted the
second part of The Siege ofRhodes. The King being come, the Scene
opened; which endeed is very fine and magnificent, and well acted,
143
all but the Eunuches, who was so much out that he was hissed off
the stage. Home and wrote letters to my Lord to Sea; and so to bed.