1661-10-30

This morning up by mooneshine; at 5 a-clock to Whitehall to
meet Mr. Moore at the Privy Seale; but he not being come as
appointed, I went into King Streete to the Red Lyon to drink my
morning draught and there I heard of a fray between the two
Embassadors of Spaine and France; and that this day being the day
of the entrance of an Embassador from Sweden, they were
entended to fight for the precedence. In Cheapeside hear that the
Spaniard hath got the best of it and killed three of the French coach-
horses and several men and is gone through the City next to our
King’s coach. At which it is strange to see how all the City did
rejoice. And endeed, we do naturally all love the Spanish and hate
the French. But I, as I am in all things curious, presently got to the
waterside and there took oares to Westminster palace, thinking to
have seen them come in thither with all the coaches; but they being
come and returned, I run after them with my boy after me, through
all the dirt and the streets full of people; till at last at the mewes I saw
the Spanish coach go, with 50 drawne swords at least to guard it and
our soldiers shouting for joy. And so I fallowed the coach, and then
met it at Yorke house, where the Embassador lies; and there it went
in with great state. So then I went to the French [ambassador’s]
house, where I observe still that there is no men in the world of a
more insolent spirit where they do well or before they begin a
matter, and more abject if they do miscarry, then these people are.
For they all look like dead men and not a word among them, but
shake their heads. So having been very much dawbed with dirt, I
got a coach and home- where I vexed my wife in telling of her this
story and pleading for the Spaniard against the French.
So ends this month. Myself and family in good condition of
health. But my head full of my Lord’s and my own and the office
business — where we are now very busy about the business of
1$7
1661 30 September—6 October
sending forces to Tanger.' And the fleet to my Lord of Sandwich,
who is now at Lisbone to bring over the Queene — who doth now
keep a Court as Queen of England. The want of money puts all
things, and above all things the Navy, out of order; and yet I do not
see that the King takes care to bring in any money, but thinks of
new designs to lay out money.
—-%OOCTOBER#-
1. This morning my wife andI lay long in bed; and among other
things, fell in talk of Musique and desired that I would let her learn
to sing — which I did consider and promised her she should: so
before I rose, word was brought me that my singing master Mr.
GoodGroome was come to teach me; and so she rise and this
morning begun to learn also. To the office, where busy all day. So
to dinner and then to the office again till night; and then to my study
at home to set matters and papers in order — which, though I can
hardly bring myself to do, yet doth please me much when it is done.
So eat a bit of bread and cheese and to bed.
5. At the office all the morning; then dined at home, and so stayed
at home all the afternoon, putting up my Lord’s Modell of the
Royall James, which I borrowed of him long ago to hang up in my
room. And at night Sir W. Pen and [alone to the Dolphin and there
eat some bloat-herrings and drank good sack. Then came in Sir W.
Warren and another and stayed a while with us; and then Sir Arnld.
Brames, with whom we stayed late and till we had drank too much
wine; so home and I to bed, pleased at my afternoon’s work in
hanging up the Shipp. So to bed.
6. Lords day. The winter coming on, many of parish ladies are
come home and appear at church again; among others, the three
sisters of the Thornburys, very fine, and the most zealous people
that ever I saw in my life; even to admiration’, if it were true zeal.
There was also my pretty black girl, Mrs. Dekins. And Mrs.
Margaret Pen this day came to church in a new flowered satin suit
that my wife helped to buy her the other day.
1. Acquired as part of Catherine of Braganza’s dowry.
158
to. Atthe office all the morning. Dined at home; and after dinner,
Sir W. Pen and my wife and I to the theatre, where the King came
today; and there was The Traytor most admirably acted—and a most
excellent play it is. So home and entended to be merry, it being my
sixth wedding night;! but bya late bruise in one of my testicles I
am in so much pain that I eat my supper and in pain to bed; yet my
wife and J pretty merry. ~