1661-01-31

At the office all the morning. And after that home; and not
staying to dine, I went out and in Paul’s churchyard I bought the
play of Henery the fourth. And so went to the new Theatre (only
calling at Mr. Crews and eat a bit with the people there at dinner)
and there saw it acted; but my expectation being too great, it did not
please me as otherwise I believe it would; and my having a book I
believe did spoil it a little. That being done, I went to my Lord’s,
where I found him private at cards with my Lord Lauderdale and
some persons of Honour; so Mr. Sheply and I over to Harpers and
105
1660 31 December
there drank a pot or two, and so parted— my boy taking a catt home
with him from my Lord’s, which Sarah hath given him for my
wife, we being much troubled with mice.
106
At the end of the last and the beginning of this year Ido live in one of
the houses belonging to the Navy office as one of the principall
officers — and have done now about half a year. After much trouble
with workmen, Iam now almost settled- my family being, myself,
my wife, Jane, Will Ewre, and Wayneman, my girl’s brother.
Myself in a constant good health — and in a most handsome and
thriving condition. Blessed be Almighty God for it. I am now
taking of my sister Paulina to come and live with me.
As to things of State— the King settled and loved of all. The Duke
of Yorke lately matched to my Lord Chancellor’s daughter, which
doth not please many. The Queene upon her return to France. The
Princesse of Orange lately dead, and we into new mourning for her.
The parliament, which hath done all this great good to the King,
beginning to grow factious, the King did dissolve it December 29
last — and another likely to be chosen speedily.
I take myself now to be worth 300! clear in money. And all my
goods and all manner of debts paid, which are none at all.
—% JANUARY
%-
1. Comes in my Brother Tho., and after him my father, Dr. Tho.
Pepys, my uncle Fenner and his two sons (Anthonys only child
dying this morning, yet he was so civil to come and was pretty
merry) to breakefast. And Ihave for thema barrel of oysters, a dish
of neat’s tongues, and a dish of Anchoves — wine of all sorts, and
Northdown ale. We were very merry till about 11 a-clock, and then
they went away. At noon I carried my wife by Coach to my Cosen
Tho. Pepys; where we, with my father, Dr. Tho., Cozen
107
Stradwick, Scott, and their wifes dined. Here I saw first his Second
wife, which is a very respectful* woman. But his dinner a sorry,
poor dinner for a man of his estate — there being nothing but
ordinary meat init.