1661-08-29

Did business in the office. So home to dinner — and my
brother Tom dined with me; and after dinner he and I alone in my
chamber hada great deal of talk, and Ifind that unless my father can
forbear to make profit of his house in London and leave it to Tom,
he hath no mind to set up the trade anywhere else. And so I know
not what to do with him. After this I went with him to my mother
and there told her how things do fall out short of our expectacions;
147
1661 29 July—14 August
which I did (though it be true) to make her leave off her spending,
whichI find she is nowadays very free in, building upon what is left
us by my uncle to bear her out in it — which troubles me much.
-*#AUGUST%-
12. At the office this morning. At home in the afternoon, and had
notice that my Lord Hinchingbrooke is fallen ill — which I fear is
with the fruits that I did give them on Saturday last at my house. So
in the evening Iwent thither and there find him very ill, and in great
fear of the smallpox. And so I went home with my heart full of
trouble for my Lord Hinchingbrooke’s sickness, and more for my
Lord Sandwich’s himself; whom we are now confirmed is sick
ashore at Alicante — who ifhe should miscarry, God knows in what
a condition would his family be.
13. To the privy Seale in the morning. Then to the Wardrobe to
dinner, where I met my wife and find my young Lord very ill. So
my Lady intends to send her other three Sons, Sidney, Oliver, and
John, to my house, for fear of the smallpox. After dinner I went to
my father’s, where I find him within and went up to him; and there
find him settling his papers against his removall,! and I took some
old papers of difference between me and my wife? and took them
away. After that, Pall being there, I spoke to my father about my
intention not to keep her longer for such and such reasons; which
troubled him and me also, and had like to have come to some high
words between my mother and me, who is become a very simple
woman. [Thence] home and there find my Lady’s three sons come,
of which Iam glad that Iam in condition to do her and my Lord any
service in this kind.
14. This morning Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Penn and I waited
upon the Duke of Yorke in his Chamber, to give him an account of
the condition of the Navy for lack of money and how our own very
bills are offered upon the Exchange to be sold at 20 in the 100 loss.
1. To Brampton.
2. Nothing 1s known of this quarrel, except that they separated for a short while,
and that Elizabeth went to live at Charing Cross.
148
He is much troubled at it, and will speak to the King and Council of
it this morning. And soI went to my Lady’s and dined with her, and
find my Lord Hinchingbrooke somewhat better. At homeI find a
letter from Mr. Creed of the 15 of July last, that tells me that my
Lord is rid of his pain (which was Wind got into the Muscles of his
right side) and his feaver, and is now in hopes to go aboard in a day
or two; which doth give me mighty great comfort.