1661-04-06

Up among my workmen. Then to Whitehall; and there at
Privy Seale and elsewhere did business. And among other things,
met with Mr. Townsend, who told of his mistake the other day to
put both his legs through one of his Knees of his breeches and went
so all day. Then with Mr. Creed and Moore to the Legg in the
Palace [Yard] to dinner — which Igave them. And after dinner I saw
the girl of the house, being very pretty, go into a chamber, and |
went in after her and kissed her. Then by water, Creed and I, to
Salsbury Court and there saw Loves Quarrell acted the first time; but
Ido not like the designe nor words. So calling at my father’s, where
they and my wife well; and so home and to bed.
8-9. Up early, my Lady Batten knocking at her door that comes
into one of my chambers — I did give directions to my people and
workmen; and so about 8 a-clock we took barge at the Tower — Sir
Wm. Batten and his Lady, Mrs. Turner, Mr. Fowler and I. A very
pleasant passage. And so to Gravesend, where we dined; and from
thence a coach took them and I and Fowler, with some others come
from Rochester to meet us, on horseback — at Rochester, where
light at Mr. Alcocks and there drank and had good sport with his
bringing out so many sorts of cheese. Then to the hill house at
Chatham,' where I never was before. And Ifind a pretty pleasant
house — and am pleased with the armes that hang up there. Here we
supped very merry, and late to bed; Sir Wm. telling me that old
Edgeborow, his predecessor, did die and walk in my chamber — did
make me somewhat afeared, but not so much as for mirth sake I did
seem. So to bed in the Treasurer’s chamber and lay and sleep well —
till 3 in the morning, and then waking; and by the light of the moon
I saw my pillow (which overnight I flung from me) stand upright,
but not bethinking myself what it might be, I was a little afeared.
But sleep overcame all, and so lay till high morning — at which time
I had a caudle brought me and a good fire made. Sir Wm. and I by
coach to the dock and there viewd all the storehouses and the old
goods that are this day to be sold, which was great pleasure to me;
and so back again by coach home -- where we had a good dinner.
And among other strangers that came, there was Mr. Hempson and
his wife, a pretty woman and speaks Latin. Mr. Allen and two
1. Used as the pay-house of the yard.
126
daughters of his, both very tall and the youngest very handsome, so
much as that I could not forbear to love her exceedingly — having,
among other things, the best hand that ever I saw. After dinner we
went to fit books and things (Tom Hater being this morning come
to us) for the Sale by an inch of candle. And very good sport we and
the ladies that stood by had to see the people bid. Among other
things sold, there was all the State’s armes; which Sir W. Batten
bought, entending to set up some of the images in his gardens and
the rest to burn on the Coronacion night. The sale being done, the
ladies and I and Capt. Pett and Mr. Castle took barge; and down we
went to see the Sovereigne; which we did, taking great pleasure
therein — singing all the way; and among other pleasures, I put my
Lady, Mrs. Turner, Mrs. Hempson, and two Mrs. Allen’s into the
lantern and I went in to them and kissed them, demanding it as a fee
due to a Principall officer. With all which we were exceeding
merry, and drank some bottles of wine and neat’s tongue, &c. Then
back again home and so supped; and after much mirth, to bed.