1662-08-17

Lords day. Up very earely, this being the last Sunday that the
Presbyterians are to preach, unless they read the new Comon
218
17 August 1662
Prayer and renounce the Covenant,'and so Ihad a mind to hear Dr.
Bates’s farewell sermon, and walked to St. Dunstans, where, it
being not 7 a-clock yet, the doors were not open; and so I went and
walked an hour in the Temple garden, reading my vows; which it is
a great content to me to see how I am a changed man, in all respects
for the better, since I took them — which the God of Heaven
continue to me and make me thankful for. At 8 a-clock I went and
crowded in at a back door among others, and the church being half-
full almost before any doors were open publicly. And so got into
the Gallry besides the pulpit and heard very well. His text was,
‘Now the god of peace’ — the last Hebrews and the 20 verse — he
making a very good sermon and very little reflections in it to
anything of the times. Besides the sermon, I was very well pleased
with the sight ofa fine lady that Ihave often seen walk in Grayes Inn
walks. After dinner to St. Dunstan’s again, and the church quite
crouded before I came, which was just at one a-clock; but I got into
the gallery again, but stood in a crowd and did exceedingly sweat all
the while. He pursued his text again very well, and only at the
conclusion told us after this manner — “I do believe that many of
you do expect that I should say something to you in reference to the
time, this being the last time that possibly I may appear here. You
know it is not my manner to speak anything in the pulpit that is
extraneous to my text and business. Yet this I shall say, that it is not
my opinion, faction, or humour that keeps me from complying
with what is required of us, but something which after much
prayer, discourse and study yet remains unsatisfied and commands
me herein. Wherefore, if it is my unhappinesse not to receive such
an illuminacion as should direct me to do otherwise, I know no
reason why men should not pardon me in this world, and am
confident that God will pardon me for it in the next.”” And so he
concluded. I hear most of the Presbyters took their leaves today.
And the City is much dissatisfied with it. I pray God keep peace
among us and make the Bishops careful of bringing in good men in
their room, or else all will fly a-pieces; for bad ones will not down
with the City.
1. According to the terms of the Act of Uniformity passed in May. As a result
about a thousand parsons were extruded from their livings, fifty or so in London
and Westminster alone. The Covenant (1643) was an attempt to impose
Presbyterianism on the Church of England as the price of Scottish help to
Parliament in the Civil War.
219