1662-08-23

Up earely and about my works in my house to see what is
done and design more. Then to my office; and by and by we sat till
noon at the office. Mr. Creede by appointment being come, he and
I went out together, and at an ordinary in Lumbardstreete dined
together; and so walked down to the Styllyard and so all along
Thames streete, but could not get a boat: I offered 8s. for a boat to
attend me this afternoon and they would not, it being the day of the
Queenes coming to town from Hampton Court. So we fairly
walked it to Whitehall; and through my Lord’s lodgings we got into
Whitehall garden, and so to the bowling-greene and up to the top of
the new banqueting-house* there over the Thames, which was a
most pleasant place as any I could have got. And all the show
consisted chiefly in the number of boats and barges — and two
Pageants, one of a King and another of a Queene, with her maydes
of honour sitting at her feet very prettily. Anon came the King and
and Queene in a barge under a Canopy, with 10000 barges and
boats I think, for we could see no water for them — nor discern the
King nor Queen. And so they landed at Whitehall bridge, and the
great guns on the other side went off. But that which pleased me
best was that my Lady Castlemayne stood over against us upon a
piece of Whitehall — where I glutted myself with looking on her.
But methought it was strange to see her Lord and her upon the same
place, walking up and down without taking notice one of another;
only, at first entry, he put off his hat and she made him a very civil
salute — but afterwards took no notice one of another. But both of
them now and then would take their child, which the nurse held in
her armes, and dandle it. One thing more; there happenda
scaffold
below to fall, and we feared some hurt but there was none; but she,
of all the great ladies only, run down among the common rabble to
see what hurt was done, and did take care of a child that received
some little hurt; which methought was so noble. Anon there came
one there, booted and spurred, that she talked long with. And by
and by, she being in her haire, she put on his hat, which was but an
ordinary one, to keep the wind off. But methought it became her
mightily, as everything else do.