1662-11-30

This morning, walking with Mr. Coventry in the garden, he
did tell me how Sir G. Carteret hath carried the business of the
Victuallers money to be paid by himself, contrary to old practice; at
which he is angry Iperceive. And yet he did not deny Sir G. Carteret
his due, in saying that he is a man that doth take the most pains and
gives himself the most to do business of any man about the Court,
without any desire of pleasure or divertisements — which is very
true. But, which pleased me mightily, he said, in these words, that
he was resolved, whatever it cost him, to make an experiment and
see whether it was possible for a man to keep himself up in Court by
dealing plainly and walking uprightly without any private game a-
playing. In the doing whereof, if his ground doth slip from under
him, he will be contented; but he is resolved to try and never to
baulke taking notice of anything that is to the King’s prejudice, let it
fall where it will — which is a most brave resolution. I would not
forget two passages of Sir]. Mennes at yesterday’s dinner. The one,
that to the Question how it comes to pass that there are no boars seen
in London, but many Sowes and pigs, it was answered that the
Constable gets them a-nights. The other, Tho. Killegrew’s way of
getting to see plays when he was a boy. He would go to the Red bull,
and when the man cried to the boys, “Who will go and be a divell,
and he shall see the play for nothing?” — then would he goin and bea
devil upon the stage, and so got to see [the] play.
231
1662 31 October—1 November
31. Lay pretty long in bed; and then up and among my workmen
— the Carpenters being this day laying of my floor in my dining-
room, with whom I stayed a good while; and so to my office and
dida little business, and so home to dinner; and after dinner, all the
afternoon with my carpenters, making them lay all my boards but
one in my dining-room this day, which I am confident they would
have made two good days’ workofifIhad not been there. Thus
ends this month. Iand my family in good health, but weary heartily
of dirt; but now in hopes within two or three weeks to be outofit.
My head troubled with much business — my law businesses for
Brampton make me mad almost, for that I want time to fallow
them; but
Imust by no means neglect them. I thank God I do save
money, though it be buta little; but I hope to find out some jobb or
other that I may get a sum by to set me up. I thank God I have no
crosses, but only much business to trouble my mind with. In all
other things, as happy a man as any in the world, for the whole
world seems to smile upon me; and if my house were done, that I
could diligently fallow my business, I would not doubt to do God
and the King, and myself, good service. And all I do impute almost
wholly to my late temperance, since my making of my vowes
against wine and plays, which keeps me most happily and
contentfully to my business — which God continue. Public matters
are full of discontent — what with the sale of Dunkirke — and my
Lady Castlemayne and her faction at Court; though I know not
what they would have, more then to debauch the King, whom God
preserve from it.
~*NOVEMBER?-
1. Up, and after a little while with my workmen, I went to my
office and then to our sitting all the morning. At noon with Mr.
Creede, whom Ifind at my house, to the Trinity house to a great
dinner there by invitation, and much company. It seem[s] one
Capt. Evans makes his Elder Brother’s dinner today. Among other
discourses, one Mr. Oudant, Secretary to the late Princesse of
Orange, did discourse of the convenience as to keeping the
highways from being deep, by their horses in Holland (and
Flanders, where the ground is as miry as ours is) going in their carts
232
and waggons, as ours in coaches.' Wishing the same here, as an
expedient to make the ways better; and Ithink there is something in
it, where there is breadth enough.