1662-10-30

Strange to see how easily my mind doth revert to its former
practice of loving plays and wine, having given myselfa liberty to
them both these two days; but this night I have again bound myself
to Christmas next, in which I desire God to bless me and preserve
226
30 September—4 October 1662
me, for under GodI find it to be the best course that ever I could
take to bring myself to mind my business. I have also made up this
evening my monthly ballance; and find that notwithstanding the
loss of 30/ to be paid to the Loyall and necessitous Cavaliers by act of
Parliament, yet 1am worth about 680l — for which the Lord God be
praised. My condition at present is this. I have long been building;
and my house, to my great content, is now almost done; but yet not
so but that I shall have dirt, which troubles me too — for my wife
hath been in the country at Brampton these two months, and is now
come home a week or two before the house is ready for her. My
mind is somewhat troubled about my best chamber, which |
Question whetherI shall be able to keep or no. I am also troubled
for my journy which I must needs take suddenly to the Court at
Brampton, but most of all for that I am not provided to understand
my business, having not minded it a great while; and at the best
shall be able but to make a bad matter of it. But God, I hope, will
guide all to the best, and I am resolved tomorrow to fall hard to it: I
pray God bless me therein, for my father and mother and all our
well-doings do depend upon my care therein.
Things are all quiet, but the King poor and no hopes almost of his
being otherwise, by which things will go to wrack, especially in the
Navy. The late outing of the presbyter Clergy, by their not
renouncing the Covenant as the act [of] Parliament commands, is
the greatest piece of state now in discourse. But for aughtI
see, they
are gone out very peaceably and the people not so much concerned
therein as was expected. My brother Tom is gone out of town this
day to make a second journey to his mistress at Banbury — of which
I have good expectations — and pray God to bless him therein. My
mind, I hope, is settled to fallow my business again, for I find that
two days’ neglect of business doth give me more discontent in mind
then ten times the pleasure thereof can repair again, be it what it
will.
~4&OCTOBER#-
4. Tomy office in the morning after I was up (my wife beginning
to make me lie long a-mornings), where we sat till noon. And then
dined at home; and after a little with my workmen, to my office till
9 at night. Among other things, examining the perticulars of the
227
miscarriage of the Satisfaccion, sunk the other day on the Duch coast
through the negligence of the pilott.