1662-04-30

Easterday. Having my old black suit new-furbished, I was
pretty neat in clothes today — and my boy, his old suit new-
187
1662 30 March—4 April
trimmed, very handsome. To church in the morning. And so
home, leaving the two Sir Wms to take the Sacrament — which I
blame myself that I have hitherto neglected all my life, but once or
twice at Cambrige. Dined with my wife, a good shoulder of veal,
well dressed by Jane and handsomely served to table — which
pleased us much and made us hope that she will serve our turns well
enough. My wife and I to church in the afternoon and seated
ourselfs, she below me; and by that means the precedence of the
pew which my Lady Batten and her daughter takes, is confounded.
And after sermon she and I did stay behind them in the pew and
went out by ourselfs a good while after them — which we judge a
veryfine project hereafter, to avoyd contention. So my wife and I
to walk an hour or two on the leads; which begins to be very
pleasant, the garden being in good condition. So to supper, which is
also well served in. We had a lobster to supper with a crab Pegg Pen
sent my wife this afternoon; the reason of which we cannot think,
but something there is of plot or design in it — for we have a little
while carried ourselfs pretty strange to them. After supper, to bed.
—+APRILL4-
1. After dinner I] and the two young ladies and my wife to the
playhouse, the Opera, and saw The Mayd in the mill, a pretty good
play. In the middle of the play, my Lady Paulina, who had taken
physique this morning, had need to go forth; and so I took the poor
lady out and carried her to the Grange, and there sent the mayde of
the house into a room to her, and she did what she had a mind to.
And so back again to the play. And that being done, in their coach I
took them to Islington; and there, after a walk in the fields, I took
them to the great Chescake house and entertained them, and so
home; and after an hour stay with my Lady, their coach carried us
home; and so, weary to bed.
4. By barge, Sir George, Sir Wms both, and I, to Deptford; and
there fell to pay off the Drake and Hampshire. | was much troubled
today to see a dead man lie floating upon the waters; and had done
(they say) these four days and nobody takes him up to bury him,
which is very barbarous.
188