1662-10-27

To my Lord Sandwich, who nowadays calls me into his
chamber, and alone did discourse with me about the jealousys that
the Court hath of people’s rising; wherein he doth much dislike my
Lord Monkes being so eagre against a company of poor wretches,
dragging them up and down the street: but would have him rather
to take some of the greatest ringleaders of them and punish them;
whereas this doth but tell the world the King’s fears and doubts.
Thence to Westminster hall and walked there long with Mr.
Creede; and then to the great half-Crowne ordinary at the King’s
head near Charing Crosse, where we had a most excellent neat
dinner and very high company, and ina noble manner. After dinner
he and I into another room over a pot of ale and talked. He showed
me’ our commission, wherein the Duke of Yorke — Prince Robt.,
Duke of Albemarle, Lord Peterburgh, Lord Sandwich, Sir G.
Carteret, Sir Wm. Compton, Mr. Coventry, Sir R. Ford, Sir Wm.
Rider, Mr. Cholmly, Mr. Povy, myself, and Capt. Cuttance, in
this order, are joyned for the carrying on the service of Tanger —
which Itake for a great honour to me. He told me what great faction
there is at Court. And above all, what is whispered, that young
Crofts is lawful son to the King, the King being married to his
mother. How true this is, God knows. But I believe the Duke of
Yorke will not be fooled in this of three crowns. Thence to
1. Pepys remained a member of the committee until 1679 and served as its
Treasurer from March 1665.
230
Whitehall and walked long in the galleries till (as they are
commanded to all strange persons) one came to tell us, we not being
known and being observed to walk there four or five houres (which
was not true), he was commanded to ask who we were; which
being told, he excused his Question and was satisfied. These things
speak great fear and jealousys. So walk to the Exchange and there
took many turnes with him. Among other things, observing one
very pretty Exchange lass with her face full of black patches, which
was a strange sight. So bid him good-night.