1662-12-25

Christmas day. Up pretty early, leaving my wife not well in
bed. And with my boy walked, it being a most brave cold and dry
frosty morning, and had a pleasant walk to Whitehall; where I
entended to have received the Comunion with the family, but I
came alittle too late. So I walked up into the house and spent my
time looking over pictures, perticularly the ships in KingH the 8ths
voyage to Bullen — marking the great difference between their build
then and now. By and by down to the Chappell again, where
Bishop Morly preached upon the Song of the Angels — “Glory to
God on high — on earth peace, and good will towards men.”
Methought he made but a poor sermon, but long and reprehending
the mistaken jollity of the Court for the true joy that shall and ought
1. Monmouth.
2. The Lord Chamberlain, the Earl of Manchester.
3. Sandwich’s second son.
243
to be on these days. Perticularized concerning their excess in playes
and gameing, saying that he whose office it is to keep the Gamesters
in order and within bounds serves but for a second rather in a Duell,
meaning the Groome porter. Upon which, it was worth observing
how far they are come from taking the Reprehensions of a Bishop
seriously, that they all laugh in the chapel when he reflected on their
ill actions and courses. The sermon done, a good Anthemne
fallowed, with vialls; and then the King came down to receive the
Sacrament, but I stayed not; but calling my boy from my Lord’s
lodging and giving Sarah some good advice, by my Lord’s order, to
be Sober and look after the house, I walked home again with great
pleasure; and there dined by my wife’s bedside with great content,
having a mess of brave plum-porridge and a roasted Pullett for
dinner; and I sent for a mince-pie abroad, my wife not being well to
make any herself yet. After dinner sat talking a good while with
her, her [pain] being become less, and then to see Sir W. Penn a
little; and so to my office, practising arithmetique alone with great
content, till 11 at night; and so home to supper and to bed.