1662-01-31

My wife and I this morning to the paynters; and there she sat
the last time and I stood by and did tell him some little things to do,
that now her picture Ithink will please me very well. And after her,
her little black dogg sat in her lap and was drawn, which made us
very merry. So home to dinner, and so to the office and there late,
finishing our estimate of the debts of the Navy to this day; and it
comes to.near 3740001.
So home; and after supper and my barber had trimmed me, I sat
down to end my Journall for this year; and my condition at this
time, by God’s blessing, is thus: My health (only upon ketching
cold, which brings great pain in my back and making of water, as it
use to be when I had the stone) very good, and so my wife’s in all
respects. My servants, W. Hewer, Sarah, Nell, and Waynman. My
house at the Navy Office. I suppose myself to be worth about so0ol
clear in the world, and my goods of my house my owne, and what
is coming to me from Brampton when my father dies — which God
defere. But by my uncles death, the whole care and trouble of all
and settling of all lies upon me; which is very great because of law-
suits, especially that with T. Trice about the inter[e]st of 200/ —
which will Ihope be ended soon. My chiefest thoughts is now to get
a good wife for Tom — there being one offered by the Joyces, a
cousin of theirs, worth 200] in ready money. Iam also upon writing
a little treatise to present to the Duke, about our privilege in the seas
as to other nations striking their flags to us. But my greatest trouble
is that Ihave for this last half-year beena very great spendthrift in all
manner of respects, that I am afeared to cast up my accounts,
though I hope I am worth what I say above. But I will cast them up
very shortly. I have newly taken a solemne oath about abstaining
from plays and wine, which I am resolved to keep according to the
letter of the oath, which Ikeepe by me. The fleete hath been ready to
sail for Portugall, but hath lack[ed] wind this fortnight. And by that
means my Lord is forced to keep at sea all this winter till he brings
home the Queen — which is the expectacion of all now — and the
greatest matter of public talk.
170
Ais
ae
SX 1662 Eke
a:
~%JANUARY+-
1. Waking this morning out of my sleep on a sudden, I did with
my elbow hit my wife a great blow over her face and nose, which
waked her with pain —at which Iwas sorry. And to sleep again. Up,
and went forth with Sir Wm. Pen by coach toward Westminster;
and in my way, seeing that The Spanish Curate was acted today, I
light and let him go alone; and I home again and sent to young Mr.
Pen and his sister to go anon with my wife and I to the Theatre.
That done, Mr. W. Pen came to me and he and I walked out, and to
the Stacioners and looked over some pictures and maps for my
house. And so home again to dinner. And by and by came the two
young Pens, and after we had eat a barrel of oysters, we went by
coach to the play and there saw it well acted, and a good play it is.
Only, Diego the Sexton did overdo his part too much.
3. Lay long in bed. And so up and abroad to several places about
petty businesses. Among other, to Tom’s, who I
find great hopes of
that he will do well, which I am glad of and am not now so hasty to
get a wife for him as I was before. So to dinner to my Lord Crew’s,
with him and his Lady. And after dinner to Faithornes and there
bought some pictures of him; and while I was there, comes by the
Kings lifeguard, he being gone to Lincolns Inne this afternoon to
see the Revells there; there being according to an old Custome, a
Prince and all his nobles, and other matters of sport and charge. So
home and up to my chamber -—to look over papers and other things,
my mind being much troubled for these four or five days because of
my present great expense, and will be so till I cast up and see how
my estate stands. And that I am loath to do, for fear Ihave spent too
much — and delay it, the rather that I may pay for my pictures and
my wife’s and the book that I am buying for Paul’s Schoole before I
do cast up my accompts.
5. Lords day. To church; and before sermon there was a long
175
psalm and half another sung out while the Sexton gathered what the
church would give him for this last year (I gave him 3s., and have
the last week given the Clerke 2s., which I set down that I may
know what to do the next year, if it please the Lord that I live so
long); but the jest was, the Clerke begins the 25 psalm, which hatha
proper tune to it, and then the 116, which cannot be sung with that
tune, which seemed very ridiculous.