1662-08-31

Up early and among my workmen and ordering my roomes
above — which will please me very well. So to my office. And
then we sat all the morning, where I begin more and more to
grow considerable there. At noon, Mr. Coventry and I by his
coach to the Exchange together and in Lumbard streete met Capt.
Browne of the Rosebush; at which he was cruel angry and did
threaten to go today to the Duke at Hampton Court and get him
turned out because he was not sailed. But at the Exchange we
resolved of eating a bit together, which we did at the Shipp,
behind the exchange; and so took boat at Billingsgate, and went
down on board the Rosebush at Woolwich and find all things out
of order; but after frighting the officers there, we left them, to
make more haste; and so on shore to the yard and did the same to
the officers of the yard, that the ship was not despatched. Here we
find Sir W. Batten going about his Survey; but so poorly and
unlike a survey of the Navy, that Iam ashamedofit and so is Mr.
Coventry. We found fault with many things; and among others,
the measure of some timber now serving in, which Mr. Day the
assistant told us of. And so by water home again, all the way
talking of the office business and other very pleasant discourse,
and much proud I am of getting thus far into his books — which I
think Iam very much in. So home late; and it being the last day of
the month, I did make up my accounts before I went to bed, and
find myself worth about 6501, for which the Lord God be praised.
And so to bed. I drank but two glasses of wine this day, and yet it
makes my head ake all night, and indisposed me all the next day —
of which I am glad.
Iam now in town only with my man Will and Jane; and because
my house is in building, Ido lie at Sir W. Pen’s house, he being gone
to Ireland. My wife, her maid and boy gone to Brampton. Iam very
216
31 July—8 August 1662
well entered into the business and esteem of the office, and do ply it
close and find benefit by it.
—%&AUGUST -
1. God forgive me, I was sorry to hear that Sir W. Pens maid
Betty was gone away yesterday, for I was in hopes to have had a
bout with her before she had gone, she being very pretty. Ihave also
a mind to my own wench, butI dare not, for fear she should prove
honest and refuse and then tell my wife.
6. At night, writing in my Study, a mouse run over my table,
which Ishut up fast under my shelfe’s upon my table till tomorrow.
And so home and to bed.
7. Up by 4a-clock and to my office; and by and by Mr. Cooper
comes and to our modell — which pleases me more and more. At
this till 8 a-clock, and so we sat in the office and stayed all the
morning, my interest still growing, for which God be praised. This
morning I got unexpectedly the Reserve for Mr. Cooper to be
Maister of, which was only by taking an opportune time to motion,
which is one good effect of my being constant at the office; that
nothing passes without me, and I have the choice of my own times
to propose anything I would have. Dined at home and to the office
again at my business all the afternoon till night, and so to supper and
to bed — it being become a pleasure to me nowadays to fallow my
business, and the greatest part of it may be imputed to my drinking
no wine and going to no plays.
8. Up by 4a-clock in the morning and at 5 by water to Woolwich,
there to see the manner of Tarring; and all the morning looking to
see the several proceedings in making of Cordage and other things
relating to that sort of works, much to my satisfaccion. At noon
came Mr. Coventree on purpose from Hampton Court to see the
same. And dined with Mr. Falconer; and after dinner, to several
experiments of Hempe and perticularly some Millan hemp that is
brought over ready-dressed. Thence we walked, talking, very
good discourse all the way to Greenwich; and | do find most
excellent discourse from him. Among other things, his rule of
217
suspecting every man that proposes anything to him to be a
knave, or at least to have some ends of his own in it. Another
rule is a proverb that he that cannot say no (that is, that is of so
good a nature that he hath, cannot deny anything or cross
another in doing anything) is not fit for business. The last of
which is a very great fault of mine, which I must amend in.
Thence by boat. And it being rough, he told me the passage of a
Frenchman through London bridge; where when he saw the great
fall, he begun to cross himself and say his prayers in the greatest
fear in the world; and as soon as he was over, he swore ‘‘Morbleu
c’est le plus grand plaisir du mond’ — being the most like a French
humour in the world. To Deptford and there surprized the yard
and called them to a muster, and discovered many abuses, which
we shall be able to understand hereafter and amend. Thence
walked to Redriffe and so to London bridge, where I parted with
him. And walked home. And didalittle business, and to supper
and to bed.