1662-06-13

Up by 4 a-clock in the morning and read Cicero’s Second
Oracion against Cataline, which pleased me exceedingly; and moreI
discern therein then ever I thought was to be found in him. But I
perceive it was my ignorance, and that he is as good a writer as ever
I read in my life. By and by to Sir G. Carterets to talk with him
about yesterday’s difference at the office; and offered my service to
look into any old books or papers that I have that may make for
him. He was well pleased therewith —and did much inveigh against
Mr. Coventry. Upon the whole, Ido find that he doth much esteem
of meand is my friend. And] may make good use of him. Thence to
several places about businesses; among others, to my Brother and
there Tom Beneere the barber trimmed me. Thence to my Lady’s
and there dined with her — Mr. Loxton, Gibbons, and Goodgroone
with us, and after dinner some Musique, and so home to my
business; and in the evening, my wife and I and Sarah and the boy, a
1. His ‘poundage’ (commission) of 3d. in the pound.
203
most pleasant walk to Halfway house; and so home and to bed.
i4. Up by 4 a-clock in the morning and upon business at my
office. Then we sat down to business; and about 11 a-clock, having
a room -got ready for us, we all went out to the Tower hill; and
there, over against the Scaffold made on purpose this day, saw Sir
Henry Vane! brought. A very great press of people. He made a
long speech, many times interrupted by the Sheriffe and others
there; and they would have taken his paper out of his hand, but he
would not let it go. But they caused all the books of those that writ
after him” to be given the Sheriffe; and the Trumpets were brought
under the scaffold, that he might not be heard. Then he prayed, and
so fitted himself and received the blow. But the Scaffold was so
crowded that we could not see it done. But Boreman, who had been
upon the Scaffold, came to us and told us that first he begun to speak
of the irregular proceeding against him; that he was, against Magna
Charta, denied to have his excepcions against the Endictment
allowed. And that there he was stopped by the Sheriffe. Then he
drow out his paper of Notes and begun to tell them; first, his life,
that he was born a Gentleman, that he was bred up and had the
Qualitys of a Gentleman, and to make him in the opinion of the
world more a Gentleman, he had been, till he was seventeen year
old, a Goodfellow. But then it pleased God to lay a foundacion of
Grace in his heart, by which he was persuaded against his worldly
interest to leave all preferment and go abroad, where he might serve
God with more freedom. Then he was called home and made a
member of the Long parliament; where he never did, to this day,
anything against his conscience, but all for the glory of God. Here
he would have given them an account of the proceedings of the
Long parliament, but they so often interrupted him, that at last he
was forced to give over; and so fell into prayer for England in
Generall, then for the churches in England, and then for the City of
London. And so fitted himself for the block and received the blow.
He had a blister or Issue upon his neck, which he desired them not
to hurt. He changed not his colour or speech to the last, but died
justifying himself and the cause he had stood for; and spoke very
confidently of his being presently at the right hand of Christ. And in
all things appeared the most resolved man that ever died in that
1. The republican politician; condemned for High Treason.
2. sc. wrote notes of his speech.
204
manner, and showed more of heate then cowardize, but yet with all
humility and gravity. One asked him why he did not pray for the
King: he answered, “‘Nay,”’ says he, “you shall see Ican pray for the
King; I pray, God bless him.”’