1662-05-28

The Doctor and I begun Philosophy discourse, exceeding
1. The Forest of Bere.
IQI
1662 28 April—2 May
pleasant. He offers to bring me into the college of the Virtuosoes
and my Lord Brunkard’s acquaintance. And to show me some
anatomy, which makes me very glad. And I shall endeavour it
when I come to London.
30. This morning Sir G. came down to the yard, and there we
mustered over all the men and determined of some regulacions in
the yard. And then to dinner, all the officers of the yard with us; and
after dinner walk to Portsmouth — there to pay off the Successe. This
afternoon, after dinner, comes Mr. Stephenton, one of the
Burgeses of the towne, to tell me that the Mayor and burgesses did
desire my acceptance of a Burgessshipp and were ready at the
Mayor[’s] to make me one. So I went and there they were all ready
and did with much civility give me my oath; and after the oath, did
by custom shake me all by the hand. So Itook them to a taverne and
made them drink; and paying the reckoning, went away. It cost me
a piece in gold to the Towne Clerk and tos. to the bayliffes, and
spent 6s.
-*MAY%-
1. SirG. Carteret, Sir W. Pen, and myself, with our clerks, set out
this morning from Portsmouth very early and got by noon to
Petersfield, several of the officers of the yard accompanying us so
far. Here we dined and were merry. To horse again after dinner,
and got to Gilford — where after supper I to bed, having this day
been offended by Sir Wm. Pens foolish talk, and I offending him
with my answers; among others, he in discourse complaining of
want of Confidence, did ask me to lend hima grain or two, which I
told him I thought he was better stored, with then myself, before Sir
George. So that Isee I must keep a greater distance then Ihave done.
And I hope I may do it, because of the interest which I am making
with Sir George. To bed all alone, and my Will in the truckle-bed.
2. earely to coach again and to Kingston, where we baitedalittle;
and presently to coach again and got earely to London; andI find all
well at home, and Mr. Hunt and his wife had dined with my wife
today — and been very kind to my wife in my absence. After I had
washed myself, it having been the hottest day that hath been this
192
year, I took them all by coach to Mrs. Hunts; and I to Dr. Clerkes
lady and give her her [husband’s] letter and token. She is a very fine
woman, and what with her person and the number of fine ladies
that were with her, Iwas much out of countenance and could hardly
carry myself like a man among them. But however, I stayed till my
courage was up again; and talked to them and viewed her house,
which is most pleasant; and so drank and goodbye.