1662-06-31

Byandbyto Whitehall, hearing that Sir G. Carteret was come
to towne; but I could not find him, and so back to Tom’s; and
thence I took my father to my house and there he dined with me —
discoursing of our business with uncle Thomas and T. Trice. After
dinner he departed, andI to the office, where we met. And that
being done, I walked to my Brother — and the Wardrobe and other
places about business, and so home. And had Sarah to comb my
head clean, whichI find so foul with poudering and other troubles,
that I am resolved to try how I can keep my head dry without
pouder. AndI did also ina sudden fit cut off allmy beard,* which I
have been a great while bringing up, only that I may with my
pumice-stone do my whole face, as I now do my chin, and so save
time — whichIfind a very easy way and gentile. So she also washed
my feet in a bath of hearbes; and so to bed.
This month ends with very fair weather for a great while
together. My health pretty well, but only wind doth now and then
torment me about the fundament extremely. The Queene is
brought a few days since to Hampton Court; and all people say of
199
1662 31 May-—3 June
her to be a very fine and handsome lady and very discreet, and that
the King is pleased enough with her: which I fear will put Madam
Castlemaines nose out of Joynt. The Court is wholly now at
Hampton. A peace with Argiers is lately made; which is also good
news. My father is lately come to towne to see us, and though it
hath cost and will cost more money, yet I am pleased with the
alteracions on my house at Brampton. My Lord Sandwich is lately
come with the Queene from Sea, very well and good repute. Upon
an audit of my estate I find myself worth about $30l de Claro. [The]
Act for Uniformity is lately printed, which it is thought will make
mad work among the presbyterian ministers. Spirits of all sides are
very much discontented; some thinking themselfs used, contrary to
promise, too hardly; and the other, that they are not rewarded so
much as they expected by the King. God keep us all. Ihave by a late
oath obliged myself from wine and playes, of which I find good
effect.
—+JUNE-
2. Upearely about business. And then to the Wardrobe with Mr.
Moore and spoke to my Lord about exchange of the Crusados into
Sterling money — and other matters. So to my father at Toms; and
after some talk with him, away home; and by and by comes my
father to dinner with me. And then by coach, setting him down in
cheapside, my wife and I to Mrs. Clarkes at Westminster, the first
visit that ever we both made her yet. We find her in a dishabillée —
entending to go to Hampton Court tomorrow. We had much
pretty discourse, and a very fine lady she is. Thence by water to
Salsbury Court, and Mrs. Turner not being at home, home by
Coach. And so after walking on the leads and supper, to bed. This
day my wife put on her slashed wastecoate, which is very pretty.
3. Up by 4 a-clock. And to my business in my chamber — to even
accounts with my Lord and myself; and very fain I would become
master of 1oool, but I have not above 530/ towards it yet. At the
office all the morning, and Mr. Coventry brought his patent and
took his place with us this morning. Upon our making a Contract, I
went, as I use to do, to draw the heads thereof; but Sir W. Pen most
basely told me that the Controller is [to] do it, and so begun to
200
imploy Mr. Turner about it, at which I was much vexed and begun
to dispute; and what with the letter of the Dukes orders, and the
practice of our predecessors, which Sir G. Carteret knew best when
he was Comptroller, it was ruled for me. What SirJ. Minnes will do
when he comes I know not, but Sir W. Penn did it like a base raskall,
and so I shall remember him while I live. After office done,. 1 went
down to the Tower wharfe, where Mr. Creed and Sheply was
ready with three chests of Crusados, being about 6000l, ready to
bring on shore to my house; which they did, and put it in my
further cellar — and Mr Sheply took the key. Thence to the
Wardrobe, where I find my Lady come from Hampton Court,
where the Queene hath used her very civilly; and my Lady tells me
is a most pretty woman-—at which Iam glad. Yesterday (Sir R. Ford
told me) the Aldermen of the City did attend her in their habitts,
and did present her with a gold Cupp, and roool in gold therein.
Home and to the office; where, about 8 at night, comes Sir G.
Carteret and Sir W. Batten. And so we did some business. And then
home and to bed, my mind troubled about Sir W. Penn — his
playing the rogue with me today. As also about the charge of
money that is in my house, which I had forgot. But I made the
maids to rise and light a candle and set it in the dining room to scare
away thiefs. And so to sleep.