1662-03-28

The boy failing to call us up as |commanded, I was angry and
I8I
1662 28 February—3 March
resolved to whip him for that and many other faults today. I bid
Will get mea rod, and he andI called the boy up to one of the upper
rooms of the Controllers house toward the garden, and there I
reckoned all his faults and whipped him soundly; but the rods were
so small that I fear they did not much to hurt him, but only to my
arme, which] am already, within a Quarter of an houre, not able to
stir almost. After supper, to bed.
—*MARCH4-
1. My wife and I by coach, first to see my little picture that is a-
drawing, and thence to the Opera and there saw Romeo and Julett,
the first time it was ever acted. But it is the play of itself the worst
that ever Iheard in my life, and the worst acted that ever I saw these
people do; and I am resolved to go no more to see the first time of
acting, for they were all of them out more or less. Thence home,
and after supper and wrote by the post—I settled to what Ihave long
entended, to cast up my accounts with myself; and after much pains
to do it and great fear, I do find that Iam $00l in money beforehand
in the world, which I was afeared I was not. But I find that I have
spent above 250l this last half year, which troubles me much. But
by God’s.blessing, I am now resolved to take up, having furnished
myself with all things for a great while, and tomorrow to think
upon some rules and obligacions upon myself to walk by.
2. Lords day. With my mind much eased, talking long in bed with
my wife about our frugall life for the time to come, proposing to
her what I could and would do if I were worth 2000; that is, be a
Knight and keep my coach- which pleased her; and so Ido hope we
shall hereafter live to save something,, for I am resolved to keep
myself by rules from expences. To church in the morning; none in
the pew but myself. So home to dinner. And after dinner came Sir
Wm. and talked with me till church time; and then to church, where
at our going out I was at a loss by Sir W. Pen’s putting me upon it
whether to take my wife or Mrs. Martha (who alone was there); and
Ibegun to take my wife, but he jogged me and so! took Martha and
led her down before him and my wife.
3d. All morning at home about business with my brother Tom
182
and then with Mr. Moore; and then I set to make some strict rules
for my future practice in my expenses, which I did bind myself in
the presence of God by oath to observe, upon penaltys therein set
down. And I do not doubt but hereafter to give a good account of
my time and to grow rich — for I do find a great deal more of content
in those few days that I do spend well about my business then in all
the pleasures of a whole week, besides the trouble which I
remember I always have after them for the expense of my money.
Dined at home and then up to my chamber again about business;
and so to the office — about despatching of the East India ships,’
where we stayed till 8 at night; and then after I had been at Sir Wm.
Pens awhile, discoursing with him and Mr. Kenard the Joyner
about the new building in his house, I went home, where I find a
vessel of oysters sent me from Chatham. AndIfell to eat some and
then to supper; and so after the barber had done, to bed. Iam told
that this day the Parliament hath voted 2s. per annum for every
chimney in England, as a constant Revenue for ever to the Crowne.
4th. At the office all the morning. Dined at home at noon. And
then to the office again in the afternoon to put things in order there,
my mind being very busy in settling the office to ourselfs,* Ihaving
now got distinct offices for the other two. By and by, Sir W. Penn
and I and my wife in his Coach to Moorefields, where we walked a
great while, though it was no fair weather and cold; and after our
walk we went to the Popeshead and eat cakes and other fine things,
and so home. I up to my chamber to read and write, and so to bed.