1663-07-27

Up in the morning about 7 a-clock; and resolved of riding to
the Wells. But it being much a warmer day then yesterday, there
was great store of gallant company, more then then to my greater
pleasure. There was at a distance, under one of the trees on the
common, a company got together that sung; I, at that distance, and
so all the rest, being a quarter of a mile off, took them for the
waytes; so I rid up to them and find them only voices — some
Citizens, met by chance, that sing four or five parts excellently. I
have not been more pleased with a snapp of Musique, considering
the circumstances of the time and place, in all my life anything so
pleasant. We drank each of us three cups; and so after riding up to
the horsemen upon the Hill where they were making of matches to
run — we went away and to Yowell, where we find our Breakefast,
the remains of our supper last night hasht. And by and by, after the
smith had set on two new shoos to Creedes horse — we mounted;
and with little discourse, I being intent upon getting home in time,
we rode hard home. Set up horse at Foxhall, and I by water
297
(observing the King’s barge attending his going to the House this
day) home, it being about one a-clock.
So got myself ready and shifting myself; and so by water to
Westminster and there came, most luckily, to the Lords House as
the House of Comons were going into the Lords’ House, and there I
crowded in along with the Speaker — and got to stand close behind
him — where he made his speech to the King (who sat with his
crown on and robes, and so all the Lords in their robes, a fine sight);
wherein he told his Majesty what they have done this parliment,
and now offered for his Royall consent. The Speakers speech was
far from any Oratory, but was as plain (though good matter) as
anything could be and void of elocution. After the bills passed, the
King, sitting in his throne with his speech writ in a paper which he
held in his lap and scarce looked off of it, I thought, all the time he
made his speech to them — giving them thanks for their subsidys.
He desired that nothing of old faults should be remembred, or
severity for the same used to any in the country, it being his desire
to have all forgot as well as forgiven. But however, to use all care in
suppressing any tumults, &c.; assuring them that the restless spirits
of his and their adversarys have great expectations of something to
be done this summer. So to Whitehall and by water to the Bridge;
and so home to bed — weary and well pleased with my Journy in all
respects. Only, it cost me about 20s.; but it was for my health and I
hope will prove so. Only, I do find by my ridingalittle swelling to
arise just by my Anus. Ihad the same the last time Irode, and then it
fell again; and now it is up again about the bigness of the bagg of
a
Silkeworme. Makes me fearful ofa Rupture, but Iwill speak to Mr.
Hollyard about it, and Iam glad to find it now, that Imay prevent it
before it goes too far.