1663-07-30

Thus, by God’s blessing, end this book of two years. Being in
all points in good health, and a good way to thrive and do well.
Some money I do and can lay up, but not much; being worth now
above 700l, besides goods of all Sorts. My wife in the country with
Ashwell her woman, with my father. Myself at home with W.
Hewre and my cook-maid Hannah, my boy Waynman being lately
run away from me. In my office, my repute and understanding
good, especially with the Duke, and Mr. Coventry. Only, the rest
of the officers do rather envy then love me, I standing in most of
their lights, especially Sir W. Batten, whose cheats I do daily
oppose, to his great trouble, though he appears mighty kind and
willing to keep friendship with mee, while Sir J. Mennes, like a
dotard, is led by the nose by him. My wife and I (by my late
jealousy, for which I am truly to be blamed) have not that fondness
between us which we used and ought to have, and I fear will be lost
hereafter ifI do not take some course to oblige her and yet preserve
1. At the battle of Ameixial (29 May, by the English calendar).
291
1663 30 June—8 July
my authority. Public matters are in an ill condition — parliament
sitting and raising four subsidys for the King, which is butalittle,
considering his wants; and yet that parted withal with great
hardness — they being offended to see so much money go, and no
debts of the public paid, but all swallowed by a luxurious Court —
which the King, it is believed and hoped, will retrench inalittle
time, when he comes to see the utmost of the Revenue which shall
be settled on him.
My differences with my uncle Tho. at a good quiett, blessed be
God, and other matters. The weather wett for two or three months
together, beyond belief; almost not one fair day coming between
till this day, which hath been a very pleasant, and the first pleasant
this summer.
—*JULY2-
4. With Creede to the King’s head ordinary; but coming late,
dined at the second table very well for 12d.; and a pretty gentleman
in our company who confirms my Lady Castlemaynes being gone
from Court, but knows not the reason. He told us ofone wipe the
Queenealittle while ago did give her, when she came in and found
the Queene under the dresser’s hands and had been so long — “I
wonder your Majesty,”’ says she, ‘‘can have the patience to sit so
long a-dressing:” ““Oh,”’ says the Queene, “I have so much reason
to use patience, that I can very well bear with it.”” He thinks that it
may be the Queene hath commanded her to retire, though that is
not likely. Thence with Creede to hire a coach to carry us to Hide
parke, today there being a general muster of the King’s Guards,
horse and foot, yet methought all these gay men are not the soldiers
that must do the King’s business, it being such as these that lost the
old King all he had and were beat by the most ordinary fellows that
could be. This day in the Dukes chamber, there being a Roman
story in the hangings and upon the standards written these four
letters, SPQR, Sir G. Carteret came to me to know what the
meaning of those four letters were — which ignorance is not to be
borne in a Privy Counsellor methinks, that a schoolboy should be
whipt for not knowing.
8. Being weary and going to bed late last night, I slept till 7 a-
292
clock, it raining mighty hard, and so did every minute of the day
after, sadly — that Iknow not what will become of the corn this year,
we having had but two fair days these many months. Up and to my
office, where all the morning busy. And then at noon home to
dinner alone, upon a good dish of eeles given me by Michell the
Bewpers-man. And then to my vialla little. And then down into
the cellar, and up and down with Mr. Turner to see where his vault
for turds may be made bigger, or another made him; which I think
may well be. And so to my office, where very busy all day setting
things in order, my contract books, and preparing things against
the next sitting. In the eveningI received letters out of the country;
among others, from my wife, who methinks writes so coldly that I
am much troubled at it andI fear shall have much ado to bring her to
her old good temper. So home to supper and music, which is all the
pleasure Ihave of late given myself or is fit Ishould others, spending
too much time and money. Going in, I stepped to Sir W. Batten and
there stayed and talked with him, my Lady being in the country,
and sent for some lobsters; and Mrs. Turner came in and did bring
us an Umble-pie hot out of her oven, extraordinary good, and
afterward some spirits of her making (in which she hath great
judgment), very good; and so home, merry with this night’s
refreshment.