1663-11-29

Up, it being my Lord Mayors Day, Sir Anthony Bateman. This
morning was brought home my new velvet cloak; that is, lined
with velvet, a good cloth the outside-—the first that ever Ihad in my
life, and I pray God it may not be too soon now that I begin to wear
it. I had it this day brought home, thinking to have worn it to
314
29 October 1663
dinner; but I thought it would be better to go without it because of
the Crowde, and so I did not wear it. In dressing myself and
wanting a band, I found all my bands that were newly made clean,
so ill-smoothed that I crumpled them and flung them all on the
ground and was angry with Jane, which made the poor girl mighty
sad, so that I were troubled for it afterwards. At noon! went forth,
and by coach to Guild Hall (by the way calling to shit at Mr.
Rawlinsons) and there was admitted; and meeting with Mr. Proby
(Sir R. Ford’s son) and Lieut.- Coll. Baron, a City commander, we
went up and down to see the tables; where under every salt there
was a Bill of fare, and at the end of the table the persons proper for
that table. Many were the tables, but none in the Hall but the
Mayors and the Lords of the privy Councell that had napkins or
knives — which was very strange. We went into the Buttry and there
stayed and talked, and then into the hall again; and there wine was
offered and they drunk, I only drinking some Hypocras, which
doth not break my vowe, it being, to the best of my present
judgment, only a mixed compound drink, and not any wine — if I
am mistaken, God forgive me; but Ihope and do think I am not. By
and by met with Creed; and we with the others went within the
several Courts and there saw the tables prepared for the ladies and
Judges and Bishops — all great sign of a great dinner to come. By and
by, about one a-clock, before the Lord Mayor came, came into the
hall, from the room where they were first led into, the Lord
Chancellor (Archbishopp before him), with the Lords of the
Council and other Bishopps, and they to dinner. Anon comes the
Lord Mayor, who went up to the Lords and then to the other tables
to bid wellcome; and so all to dinner. I set near Proby, Baron, and
Creed at the Merchant Strangers table — where ten good dishes to a
messe, with plenty of wine of all sorts, of which Idrunk none; but it
was very unpleasing that we had no napkins nor change of
trenchers, and drunk out of earthen pitchers and wooden dishes. It
happened that, after the Lords had half dined, came the French
Ambassador up to the Lords’ table, where he was to have sat; but
finding the table set, he would not sit down nor dine with the Lord
Mayor, who was not yet come, nor have a table to himself, which
was offered; but in a discontent went away again. After Ihad dined,
I and Creed rose and went up and down the house, and up to the
ladies room and there stayed gazing upon them. But though there
were many and fine, both young and old, yet I could not discern
one handsome face there, which was very strange. I expected
315
1663 29 October—1 November
Musique, but there was none; but only trumpets and drums, which
displeased me. The dinner, it seems, is made by the Mayor and two
Sheriffs for the time being, the Lord Mayor paying one half and
they the other — and the whole, Proby says, is reckoned to come to
about 7 or 800/ at most. Being wearied with looking upon a
company of ugly women, Creed and I went away; and took coach
and through Cheapside and there saw the pageants, which were
very silly. And thence to the Temple; where meeting Greatorex, he
and we to the Hercules pillers, there to show me the manner of his
going about a great work of drayning of Fenns, which I desired
much to know; but it did not appear very satisfactory to me as he
discoursed it, and I doubt he will fail in it.
31. Torthe office, where busy till night; and then to prepare my
monthly account, about whichI stayed till 10 or 11 a-clock at night;
and to my great sorrow, find myself 43! worse then I was the last
month; which was then 760! and now is but 717/. But it hath chiefly
arisen from my layings-out in clothes for myself and wife —viz., for
her, about 12/; and for myself, 55/ or thereabouts — having made
myself a velvet cloak, two new cloth-suits, black, plain both — a
new shag-gown, trimmed with gold buttons and twist; with a new
hat, and silk top[s] for my legs, and many other things, being
resolved henceforward to go like myself. And also two periwigs,
one whereof costs me 3/ and the other gos. I have wore neither yet,
but will begin next week, God willing. So that I hope I shall not
now need to lay out more money a great while, I having laid out in
clothes for myself and wife, and for her closet and other things
without, these two months (this and the last), besides household
expenses of victuals &c., above rrol. But I hope I shall with more
comfort labour to get more, and with better successe then when,
for want of clothes, I was forced to sneak like a beggar. Having
done this, I went home; and after supper to bed.
~*NOVEMBER®-
1. Lords day. This morning my brother’s man brought me a new
black bays waistcoat faced with silk, which I put on— from this day
laying by half-shirts for this winter. He brought me also my new
gowne of purple Shagg, trimmed with gold, very handsome. He
316
also brought me, asa gift from my brother, a velvet hat, very fine to
ride in and the fashion, which pleases me very well; to which end I
believe he sent it me, for he knew I had lately been angry with him.
Up and to church with my wife; and at noon dined at home alone—a
good calf’s head boiled and dumplings, an excellent dinner
methought it was.