1663-11-09

To Westminster hall, where I met with Mr. Pierce the surgeon;
and among other things, he asked me seriously whether I knew
318
9 November 1663
anything of my Lord’s being out of Favour with the King. And told
me that for certain the King doth take mighty notice of my Lord’s
living obscurely in a corner, not like himself and becoming the
honour that he is come to. He told me also how loose the Court is,
nobody looking after business but every man his lust and gain; and
how the King is now become besotted upon Mrs. Steward, that he
gets into corners and will be with her half an hour together, kissing
her to the observation of all the world; and she now stays by herself
and expects it, as my Lady Castlemayne did use to do; to whom the
King, he says, is still kind, so as now and then he goes to havea chat
with her as he believes, but with no such fondness as he used to do.
But yet it is thought that this new wench is so subtle, that she lets
him not do anything more then is safe to her. But yet his doting is so
great that Pierce tells me it is verily thought, that if the Queen had
died, he would have married her. The Duke of Monmouth is to
have part of the Cockepitt new built for lodgings for him; and they
say to be made Captain of the Guards in the room of my Lord
Gerard. In the evening to the Coffee-house and there sat, till by and
by, by appointment, Will brought me word that his uncle Blacke-
burne was ready to speak with me. So I went down to him, and he
and I to a taverne hard by. Mr. Blackeburne and I fell to talk of
many things; wherein I did speak so freely to him in many things
agreeing with his sense, that he was very open to me in all things.
First, in that of Religion, he makes it great matter of prudence for
the King and Council to suffer liberty of conscience. And imputes
the loss of Hungary to the Turke from the Emperors denying them
this liberty of their religion. He says that many pious Ministers of
the word of God — some thousands of them, do now beg their
bread. And told me how highly the present Clergy carry themselfs
everywhere, so as that they are hated and laughed at by everybody.
He tells me that the King, by name, with all his dignities, is prayed
for by them that they call Fanatiques, as heartily and powerfully as
in any of the other churches that are thought better. And that let the
King think what he will, it is them that must help him in the day of
Warr — for, as they are the most, so generally they are the most
substantiall sort of people, and the soberest. And did desire me to
observe it to my Lord Sandwich, among other things, that of all
the old army now, you cannot see a man begging about the street.
But what? You shall have this Captain turned a shoemaker; the
lieutenant, a Baker; this, a brewer; that, a haberdasher; this
common soldier, a porter; and every man in his apron and frock,
319
1663 g—11 November
&c., as if they never had done anything else — whereas the
[Cavaliers] go with their belts and swords, swearing and cursing
and stealing — running into people’s houses, by force oftentimes, to
carry away something. And this is the difference between the
temper of one and the other; and concludes (and I think with some
reason) that the spirits of the old Parliament-soldier[s] are so quiet
and contented with God’s providences, that the King is safer from
any evil meant him by them, a thousand times more then from his
own discontented Cavalier[s]. And then to the public management
of business: it is done, as he observes, so loosely and so carelessly,
that the kingdom can never be happy with it, every man looking
after himself and his own lust and luxury; among other things, he
instanced in the business of mony; he doth believe that half of what
the Parliament gives the King is not so much as gathered.
From thence we begun to talk of the Navy, and perticularly of Sir
W. Pen—of whose rise to be a general I had a mind to be informed.
He told me he was always a conceited man and one that would put
the best side outward, but that it was his pretence of sanctity that
brought him into play. Lawson and Portman and the Fifth-
monarchy men, among whom he wasa
great brother, importuned
that he might be general; and it was pleasant to see how Blackburn
himself did act it; how when the Comissioners of the Admiralty
would enquire of the Captains and Admiralls of such and such men,
how they would with a sithe and casting up the eye say, “Such a
man fears the Lord” — or, “I hope such a man hath the Spirit of
God,” and such things as that. But he tells me that there was a cruel
Articling against Pen after one fight, for cowardice in putting
himself within a Coyle of Cables, of which he had much ado to
acquit himself. Thus far, and upon many more things, we had
discoursed, when some persons in a room hard by begun to sing in
three parts very finely, and to play upon a Flagilette so pleasantly,
that my discourse afterward was but troublesome andI could not
attend it; and so anon considering of a sudden the time a-night, we
find it 11 a-clock, which I thought it had not been by two hours, but
we were close in talk; and so we rise, he having drunk some wine
and I some beer and sugar, and so by a fair moonshine home and to
bed. My wife troubled with toothake.
11. Upand to my office all the morning; and at noon to the
Coffee-house, where with Dr. Allen some good discourse about
physic and Chymistry. And among other things, I telling him what
320
Dribble the German Doctor do offer, of an Instrument to sink
ships, he tells me that which is more strange: that something made
of gold, which they call in Chymistry Aurum Fulminans; a grain, |
think he said, of it put into a silver spoon and fired, will give a blow
like a musquett and strike a hole through the spoon downward,
without the least force upward.