1663-06-15

Up betimes; and anon my wife rose and did give me her keys
and put other things in order, and herself, against her going this
morning into the country. I was forced to go to Thames street and
strike up a bargaine for some tarr, to prevent being abused therein
286
15 June . 1663
by Hill, who was with me this morning and is mightily surprized
that I should tell him what I can have the same tarr with his for.
Thence home; but finding my wife gone, I took coach and after her
to her Inne; where I am troubled to see her forced to sit in the back of
the coach, though pleased to see her company, none but women
and one parson. And so kissing her often and Ashwell once, I bid
them Adieu; and so home by coach and thence by water to
Deptford to the Trinity house, where I came alittle late but I found
them reading their charter; which they did like fools, only reading
here and there a bit, whereas they ought to do it all, every word; and
then proceeded to the Eleccion of a Maister, which was Sir W.
Batten, who made a heavy, short speech to them, moving them to
give thanks to the late Maister for his pains, which he said was very
great, and giving them thanks for their choice of him, wherein he
would serve them to the best of his power. Then to the choice of
their Assistants and Wardens, and so rose. Thence to church, where
Dr. Britton preached a sermon full of words against the Noncon-
formists; but no great matter in it, nor proper for the day at all. His
text was, ““With one minde and one mouth give glory to God, the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ.”
That done, by water, I in the barge with the Maister, to the
Trinity house at London, where, among others, I find my Lord
Sandwich and Craven and my Cosen Rogr. Pepys and Sir Wm.
Wheeler. Anon we sat down to dinner; which was very great, as
they always have. Great variety of talk. Both at and after dinner we
had great discourses of the nature and power of Spirits and whether
they can animate dead bodies; in all which, as of the general
appearing of spirits, my Lord Sandwich is very scepticall. He says
the greatest warrants that ever he had to believe any, is the present
appearing of the Devil in Wiltshire, much of late talked of, who
beats a drum up and down; there is books of it, and they say very
true. But my Lord observes that though he doth answer to any tune
that you will play to him upon another drum, yet one tune he tried
to play and could not; which makes him suspect the whole, and I
think it is a good argument. Sometimes they talked of handsome
women; and Sir J. Mennes saying that there was no beauty like
what he sees in the country-markets, and especially at Bury, in
which I will agree with him that there is a prettiest woman I ever
saw — my Lord replied: ““Why, Sir John, what do you think of your
neighbour’s wife?” looking upon me, “do not you think that he
hath a great beauty to his wife? Upon my word he hath!” — whichI
287
was nota little proud of. Thence by Barge along with my Lord to
Blackefryers, where he landed; and I thence walked home, where
vexed to find my boy (whom I boxed at his coming for it) and Will
abroad, though he was but upon tower hill a very little while. My
head akeing with the healths I was forced to drink today, I sent for
the barber; and he having done,I up to my wife’s closet and there
played on my viallin a good while; and without supper, anon to bed
—sad for want of my wife, whom Ilove with all my heart, though of
late she hath given me some troubled thoughts.