1663-02-21

Upand to the office, where Sir John Minnes (mostofthe rest
being at the Parliament-house); all the morning [an]|swering
petitions and other business. Towards noon there comes a man in,
as if upon ordinary business, and shows me a Writt from the
Exchequer, called a Comission of Rebellion,’ and tells me that Iam
his prisoner — in Fields business. Which methought did strike me to
the heart, to think that we could not sit safe in the middle of the
King’s business. I told him how and where we were imployed and
bid him have a care; and perceiving that we were busy, he said he
would and did withdraw for an houre-in which time Sir
J.Minnes
took coach and to Court to see what he could do from thence; and
our Sollicitor against Field came by chance and told me that he
would go and satisfy the fees of the Court and would end the
business. So he went away about that, and I stayed in my closet, till
by and by the man and four more of his fellows came to know what
I would do; I told them stay till I heard from the King or my Lord
Chief Baron, to both whom I had now sent. With that they
consulted and told me that if I would promise to stay in the house
they would go and refresh themselfs, and come again and know
what answer I had. So they away and Ihome to dinner — whither by
chance in comes Mr. Hawly and dined with me. Before Ihad dined,
the Baylys came back again with the Constable, and at the office
knock for me but found me not there; and Ihearing in what manner
they were come, did forbear letting them know where I was. So
they stood knocking and enquiring for me. By and by at my
parlour-window comes Sir W. Batten’s Mingo to tell me that his
Maister and Lady would have me come to their house through SirJ.
Mennes’s lodgings, which I could not do; but however, by lathers
did get over the pale between our yards and so to their house, where
1. A writ used to secure the appearance of defendant. For the case, see above, p. 190
(13 April) & n.
259
Ifind them (as they have reason) to be much concerned for me— my
Lady especially.
The fellows stayed in the yard swearing with one or two
constables; and some time we locked them into the yard and by
and by let them out again, and so keeped them all the afternoon,
not letting them see me or know where I was. One time, I went
up to the top of Sir W. Batten’s house and out of one of their
windows spoke to my wife out of one of ours — which methought,
though I did it in mirth, yet I was sad to think what a sad thing it
would be for me to be really in that condition. By and by comes
Sir
J.Mennes, who (like himself and all that he doth) tells us that
he can do no good, but that my Lord Chancellor wonders that we
did not cause the seamen to fall about their eares — which we
wished we could have done without our being seen in it; and
Capt. Grove being there, he did give them some affront and
would have got some seamen to have drubbed them,but he had
not time nor did we think it fit to have it done, they having
executed their commission. But there was occasion given that he
did draw his sword upon one of them and he did complain that
Grove had pricked him in the breast — but no hurt done; but I saw
that Grove would have done our business to them if we had bid
him. By and by comes Mr. Clerke our Sollicitor, who brings us a
release from our adverse atturny, we paying the fees of the
Comission, which comes to five markes, and pay the charges of
these fellows, which are called the Comissioners (but are the most
rake-shamed rogues that ever I saw in my life); so he showed them
his release and [they] seemed satisfied and went away with him to
their atturny to be paid by him. But before they went, Sir W.
Batten and my Lady did begin to taunt them; but the rogues
answered them as high as themselfs and swore they would come
again, and called me rogue and Rebell and they would bring the
Sheriffe and untile his house before he should harbour a Rebell in
his house — and that they would be here again shortly. Well, at last
they went away; and I by advice took occasion to go abroad, and
walked through the street to show myself among the neighbours,
that they might not think worse then the business is.