1663-06-31

This month, the greatest news is the heighth and heat that the
Parliament is in enquiring into the Revenue, which displeases the
Court, and their backwardness to give the King any money. Their
enquiring into the selling of places doth trouble a great many;
among the chief, my Lord Chancellor (against whom perticularly it
is carried) and Mr. Coventry, for which I am sorry. The King of
France was given out to be poisoned and dead; but it proves to be
the meazles and is well, or likely to be soon well again. Ifind myself
growing in the esteem and credit that I have in the office, and Ihope
falling to my business again will confirm me in it, and the saving of
money — which God grant. :
My whole family lying longer this morning then was fit, and
besides, Will having neglected to brush my cloak as he ought to do
till I was ready to go to church, and not then till I bid him, I was
very angry; and seeing him make little matter of it, but seeming to
make a matter indifferent whether he did it or no, I did give him
[a] box on the eare, and had it been another day had done more.
282
31 May—4 June 1663
This is the second time I ever struck him.
~eJUNE4-
2. Up and by water to Whitehall; and so to St. James to Mr.
Coventry, where I had an hour’s private talk with him. Most of it
was discourse concerning his own condition, at present being under
the censure of the House, being concerned with others in the Bill for
selling of offices. He undertakes to prove that he did never take a
token of any Captain to get him imployed in his life beforehand, or
demanded anything. And for the other accusacion, that the
Cavaliers are not imployed, he looked over the list of them now in
the service, and of the 27 that are imployed, 13 have been heretofore
alway under the King. Two, Neutralls; and the other 12 men of
great courage and such as had either the King’s perticular command
or great recomendacion to put them in, and none by himself.
Besides that, he says it is not the King’s nor Dukes opinion that the
whole party of the late officers should be rendered desperate; and
lastly, he confesses that the more of the Cavaliers are put in, the less
of discipline hath fallowed in the fleet; and that whenever there
comes occasion, it must be the old ones that must do any good —
there being none, he says, but Capt. Allen good for anything of
them all.
3. To the Exchange and thence home to dinner, taking Deane of
Woolwich along with me; and he dined alone with me, [my] wife
being undressed, and he and Ispent all the afternoon finely, learning
of him the method of drawing the lines of a ship, to my great
satisfaction; and which is well worth my spending some time in, as I
shall do when my wife is gone into the country. In the evening to
the office and did some business. Then home and, God forgive me,
did from my wife’s unwillingness to tell me whither she had sent
the boy, presently suspect that he was gone to Pembleton’s, and
from that occasion grew so discontented that I could hardly speak
or sleep all night.
4. Idid bya wile get out of my boy that he did not yesterday go to
Pembleton’s or thereabouts, but only was sent at that time for some
starch; and I did see him bring home some — and yet all this cannot
283
make my mind quiet. In [Westminster] hall today, Dr. Pierce tells
me that the Queene begins to be briske and play like other ladies,
and is quite another woman from what she was, of which I am glad
—it may be it may make the King like her the better and forsake his
two mistresses, my Lady Castlemaine and Steward.