1663-05-27

Sol waked by 3 a-clock, my mind being troubled; and so took
occasion by making water to wake my wife, and after having lain
till past 4 a-clock, seemed going to rise, though I did it only to see
what she would do; and so going out of
the bed, she took hold of me
and would know what ayled me; and after many kind and some
cross words, I begun to tax her discretion in yesterday’s business,
but she quickly told me my owne, knowing well enough that it was
my old disease of Jealousy; which I disowned, but to no purpose.
After an hour’s discourse, sometimes high and sometimes kind, I
find very good reason to think that her freedom with him was very
279
1663 27 May
great and more then was convenient, but with no evil intent. And
so after a while I caressed her and parted seeming friends, but she
crying and in a great discontent. So I up and by water to the
Temple. Here I met with my Cosen Roger Pepys and walked a
good while with him; and among other discourse, as a secret he
hath committed to nobody yet but myself, he tells me that his sister
Claxton now resolving to give over the keeping of his house at
Impington, he thinks it fit to marry again; and would have me, by
the help of my uncle Wight or others, to look him out a widow
between 30 and 40 year old, without children and with a fortune,
which he will answer in any degree with a Joynture fit for her
fortune. A woman sober and no high flyer as he calls it. I demanded
his estate; he tells me (which he says also he hath not done to any)
that his estate is not full 800! per annum, but it is 780/ per annum — of
which 200! is by the death of his last wife; which he will allot for a
Joynture for a wife, but the rest, which lies in Cambrigeshire, he is
resolved to leave entire for his eldest son. I undertook to do what I
can init, and soI shall. He tells me that the King hath sent to them!
to hasten to make an end by Midsummer; so they have set upon
four bills to despatch — the first of which is, he says, too devilish a
severe act against conventicles; so beyond all moderation, that he is
afeared it will ruin all. Telling me that it is matter of the greatest
grief to him in the world that he should be put upon this trust of
being a parliament-man, because he says nothing is done, that he
can see, out of any truth and sincerity, but mere envy and design.
Thence by water to Chelsy, all the way readingalittle book I
bought of Improvement of trade, a pretty book and many things
useful in it. So walked to Little Chelsy, where I find my Lord
Sandwich with Mr. Becke, the maister of the house, and Mr. Creed
at dinner. And I sat down with them, and very merry. After dinner
(Mr. Gibbons being come in also before dinner done) to Musique;
they played a good Fancy, to which my Lord is fallen again and says
he cannot endure a merry tune — which is a strange turn of his
humour, after he hath for two or three years flung off the practice of
Fancies and played only fiddlers tunes. Then into the great garden
up to the banquetting-house; and there by his glass we drow in the
Species very pretty. Afterwards to ninepins, where I won ashilling
— Creed and I playing against My Lord and Cooke. This day there
was great thronging to Bansted downes, upon a great horse-race
1. The House of Commons.
280
and foot-race; I am sorry I could not go thither.
So home, back as I came, to London bridge and so home — where
I find my wife in a musty humour, and tells me before Ashwell that
Pembleton had been there and she would not have him come in
unless I was there, which I was ashamed of; but however, I had
rather it should be so then the other way. So to my office to put
things in order there. And by and by comes Pembleton and word is
brought me from my wife thereof, that I might come home; so I
sent word that I would have her go dance, and I would come
presently. So being at a great loss whether I should appear to
Pembleton or no, and which would most proclaim my Jealousy to
him, Iat last resolved to go home; and took Tom Hater with me and
stayed a good while in my chamber, and there took occasion to tell
him how I hear that parliament is putting an act out against all sorts
of Conventicles and did give him good counsel, not only in his own
behalfe but my own, that ifhe did hear or know anything that could
be said to my prejudice, that he would tell me; for in this wicked age
(especially Sir W. Batten being so open to my reproches andSirJ.
Mennes, for the neglect of their duty, and so will think themselfs
obliged to scandalize me all they can to right themselfs ifthere shall
be any enquiry into the matters of the Navy, as no doubt there will)
a man ought to be prepared to answer for himself
in all things that
can be enquired concerning him. After much discourse of this
nature to him, I sent him away and then went up; and there we
danced country dances and single, my wife and I, and my wife paid
him off for this month also, and so he is cleared. After dancing, we
took him down to supper and were very merry; and I made myself
so and kind to him as much as I could, to prevent his discourse;
though I perceive to my trouble that he knows all, and my doty
doth me the disgrace to publish it as much as she can. Which I take
very ill, and if too much provoked shall witness it to her. After
supper and he gone, we to bed.