1663-01-09

My wife begun to speak again of the necessity of her keeping
somebody to bear her company; for her familiarity with her other
servants is it that spoils them all, and other company she hath none
(which is too true); and called for Jane to reach her out of her trunk,
giving her the keys to that purpose, a bundle of papers; and pulls out
a paper, a copy of what, a pretty while since, she had writ in a
discontent to me, which I would not read but burned.’ She now
read it, and was so picquant, and wrote in English and most of it
true, of the retirednesse of her life and how unpleasant it was, that
being writ in English and so in danger of being met with and read
1. See above, p. 235 (13 November).
251
1663 g—12 January
by others, I was vexed at it and desired her and then commanded
her to teare it — which she desired to be excused it; I forced it from
her and tore it, and withal took her other bundle of papers from her
and leapt out of the bed and in my shirt clapped them into the
pockets of my breeches, that she might not get them from me; and
having got on my stockings and breeches and gown, I pulled them
out one by one and tore them all before her face, though it went
against my heart to do it, she crying and desiring me not to do it.
But such was my passion and trouble to see the letters of my love to
her, and my Will, wherein I had given her all I have in the world
when I went to sea with my Lord Sandwich, to be joyned with a
paper of so much disgrace to me and dishonour if it should have
been found by anybody. Having tore them all, saving a bond of my
uncle Robts. which she hath long had in her hands, and our
Marzviage licence and the first letter that ever I sent her when I was
her servant, Itook up the pieces and carried them into my chamber,
and there, after many disputes with myself whether I should burn
them or no, and having picked up the pieces of paper she read today
and of my Will whichI tore, I burnt all the rest. And so went out to
my office — troubled in mind. Mr. Bland came in the evening to me
hither, and sat talking to me about many things of Merchandize;
and I should be very happy in his discourse, durst I confess my
ignorance to him, which is not so fit for me to do.
12. With Mr. Creede to the Kings head ordinary; but people
being sat down, we went to two or three places; at last found some
meat at a welch cook’s at Charing cross and there dined, and our
boys. After dinner to the Change to buy some linen for my wife;
and going back, met our two boys; mine had struck down Creedes
boy in the dirt, with his new suit on in the dirt, all over dirty, and
the boy taken by a gentlewoman into a house to make clean, but the
poor boy was ina
pitiful taking and pickle; but I basted my rogue
soundly. So I went to the [Tangier] Comittee, where we spent all
this night attending to Sir
J.Lawsons description of Tanger and the
place for the molde, of which he brought a very pretty draught.
Concerning the making of the molle, Mr. Cholmely did also
discourse very well, having had some experience in it. So home,
and find my wife’s new gowne come home and she mightily
pleased with it. But I appeared very angry that there was no more
things got ready against tomorrow’s feast, and in that passion sat up
long and went discontented to bed.
262