1663-07-25

‘To Clapham to Mr. Gaudens, who had sent his coach for me.
When I came [thither], our first thing was to show me his house
which is almost built, wherein he and his family lives. I find the
house very regular and finely contrived, and the gardens and offices
about it as convenient and as full of good variety as ever saw in my
life. It is true he hath been censured for laying out so much money;
but he tells me that he built it for his brother, who is since dead (the
Bishopp); who, when he should come to be Bishop of Winchester,
which he was promised, to which Bishopricke at present there is no
house, he did entend to dwell here. Besides, with the good
husbandry in making his bricks and other things, I do not think it
costs him so much money as people think and discourse. I saluted
his lady and the young ladies, he having many pretty children, and
his sister, the Bishop’s widow, who was, it seems, Sir W. Russells
daughter, the Treasurer of the Navy — who, by her discourse at
dinner, I find to be a very well-bred and a woman of excellent
discourse — even so much as to have my attention all dinner with
much more pleasure then Idid give to Creede, whose discourse was
mighty merry in inveighing against Mr. Gaudens victuals that they
had at sea the last voyage; which he prosecuted till methought the
women begun to take it seriously. After dinner, by Mr. Gaudens
motion, we got Mrs. Gauden and her sister to sing to a viall, on
which Mr. Gaudens eldest son (a pretty man, but a simple one
methinks) played — but very poorly and the Musique bad, but yet I
295
commended it. I took the viall and played some things from one of
their books, Lyra lessons, which they seemed to like well. Thus we
passed an hour or two after dinner, and towards the evening we
bade them Adieu and took horse, being resolved that we would go
to Epsum; so we set out; and being gonealittle way, I sent home
Will to look to the house, and Creed and I rid forward — the road
being full of citizens going and coming towards Epsum — where,
when we came, we could hear of no lodging, the town so full. But
which was better, I went towards Ashted, my old place of pleasure,
and there (by direction of one goodman Arthur, whom we met on
the way) we went to Farmer Page’s, and there we got a lodging ina
little hole we could not stand upright in, upon a low truckle-bed.
But rather then go further to look, we stayed there. And while
supper was getting ready, I took him to walk up and down behind
my Cosen Pepys’s house that was, which Ifind comes [a] little short
of what I took it to be when I was alittle boy (as things use
commonly to appear greater then then when one comes to be a man
and know more); and so up and down in the Closes which I know
so well methinks, and account it good fortune that I lie here, that I
may have opportunity to renew my old walks. So to our lodging to
supper; and among other meat, had a brave dish of creame, the best
I ever eat in my life — and with which we pleased ourselfs much.
And by and by to bed, where with much ado, yet good sport, we
made shift to lie, but with little ease.