1663-05-15

Up betimes and walked to St. James’s; where Mr Coventry
being in bed, I walked in the park, discoursing with the keeper of
the Pell Mell who was sweeping of it — who told me of what the
earth is mixed that doth floor the Mall, and that over all there is
Cockle-shells powdered and spread, to keep it fast; which however,
in dry weather turns to dust and deads the ball. Thence to Mr.
Coventry ; and sitting by his bedside, he did tell me that he sent for
me to discourse upon my Lord Sandwiches allowances for his
several pays, and what his thoughts are concerning his demands;
which he could not take the freedom to do face to face, it being not
so proper as by me; and did give me a most friendly and ingenious
account of all. After done with him about those things, he told me
that for Mr. Hater, the Dukes word was, in short, that he found he
had a good servant, an Anabaptist; and unless he did carry himself
more to the scandall of the office, he would bear with his opinion till
he heard further — which doth please me very much. To dinner with
274
[my Lord], there dining there my Lord Mountagu of Boughton,
Mr Wm. Mountague his brother, the Queen’s Sollicitor, &c.; anda
fine dinner. Their talk about a ridiculous falling-out two days ago at
my Lord of Oxfords house at an entertainment of his, there being
there my Lord of Albemarle, Lynsey, two of the Porters, my Lord
Bellasse[s], and others; where there was high words and some
blows and pulling off of perriwiggs — till my Lord Monke took
away some of their swords and sent for some soldiers to guard the
house till the fray was ended. To such a degree of madness the
nobility of this age is come.
After dinner I went up to Sir Tho. Crew, who lies there not very
well in his head, being troubled with vapours and fits of dizzinesse;
and there I sat talking with him all the afternoon, from one
discourse to another. The most was upon the unhappy posture of
things at this time; that the King doth mind nothing but pleasures
and hates the very sight or thoughts of business. That my Lady
Castlemayne rules him; who he says hath all the tricks of Aretin that
are to be practised to give pleasure. It seems the present favourites
now are my Lord Bristoll, Duke of Buckingham, Sir H. Bennet,
my Lord Ashley, and Sir Ch. Berkely; who among them have cast
my Lord Chancellor upon his back, past ever getting up again; there
being now little for him to do, and waits at court attending to speak
to the King as others do. My Lord Albemarle, I hear, doth bear
through and bustle among them and will not be removed from the
King’s good opinion and favour, though none of the Cabinett; but
yet he is envied enough. It is made very doubtful whether the King
doth not entend the making of the Duke of Monmouth legitimate;
but surely the Commons of England will never do it nor the Duke
of Yorke suffer it— whose lady I am told is very troublesome to him
by her jealousy. Having thus freely talked with him and of many
more things, I took leave; and by coach to St. James’s and there told
Mr. Coventry what I had done with my Lord, with great
satisfaction; and so, well pleased, home — where I find it almost
night and my wife and the Dancing Maister alone above, not
dancing but walking. Now, so deadly full ofjealousy Iam, that my
heart and head did so cast about and fret, that I could not do any
business possibly, but went out to my office; and anon late home
again, and ready to chide at everything; and then suddenly to bed
and could hardly sleep, yet durst not say anything.