1663-03-25

The Commons in parliament, I hear, are very high to stand to
the act of uniformity, and will not indulge the papists (which is
endeavoured by the court party) nor the Presbyters.
260
27 February—9 March 1663
27. Up and to my office, whither several persons came to me
about office business. About 11 a-clock Comissioner Pett and I
walked to Chyrurgeons hall (we being all invited thither and
promised to dine there), where we were led into the Theatre; and by
and by came the Reader, Dr. Tearne, with the Maister and
Company, in a very handsome manner; and all being settled, he
begun his lecture, this being the second upon the Kidnys, Ureters,
and yard, which was very fine; and his discourse being ended, we
walked into the hall; and there being great store of company we had
a fine dinner and good learned company, many Doctors of
Physique, and we used with extraordinary great respect. After
dinner Dr. Scarborough took some of his friends, and I went along
with them, to see the body alone; which we did; he was a lusty
fellow, aseaman that was hanged fora robbery. Idid touch the dead
body with my bare hand; it felt cold, but methought it was a very
unpleasant sight. But all the Doctors at table conclude that there is
no pain at all in hanging, for that it doth stop the circulacion of the
blood and so stops all sense and motion in an instant. Thence we
went into a private room, whereI perceive they prepare the bodies,
and there was the Kidnys, Ureters, yard, stones and semenary
vessels upon which he read today. And Dr. Scarborough, upon my
desire and the company’s, did show very clearly the manner of the
disease of the stone and the cutting and all other Questions that I
could think of.
—~&MARCH3-
9. Up betimes to my office, where all the morning. About noon
Sir J. Robinson, Lord Mayor, desiring way through the garden
from the Tower, called in at the office and there invited me (and Sir
W. Penn, who happened to be in the way) to dinner, which we did.
And there hada great Lent dinner of fish, little flesh. And thence he
and I in his coach, against my will (for I am resolved to shun too
great fellowship with him) to Whitehall; but came too late, the
Duke having been with our fellow-officers before we came, for
which Iwas sorry. Thence he and Ito walk one turn in the parke and
so home by coach, and I to my office, where late; and so home to
supper and bed. There dined with us today Mr. Slingsby of the
Mint, who showed us all the new pieces, both gold and silver
261
(examples of them all), that are made for the King by Blondeaus
way, and compared them with those made for Oliver —the pictures
of the latter made by Symons, and of the King by one Rotyr, a
German I think, that dined with us also. He extolls these of Rotyrs
above the others; and endeed, I think they are the better, because the
sweeter of the two; but upon my word, those of the Protectors are
more like in my mind then the King’s — but both very well worth
seeing.