1663-11-22

Lords day. Up pretty early; and having last night bespoke a
coach, which failed me this morning, I walked as far as the Temple
and there took coach and to my Lord’s lodgings; whom Ifind ready
to go to chappell. But coming, he begin with a very serious
countenance to tell me that he had received my late letter; wherein,
first he took notice of my care of him and his honour and did give
me thanks for that part of it where I say that from my heart Ibelieve
the contrary of what I do there relate to be the discourse of others.
But since I entended it not a reproach, but matter of information
and for him to make a judgment of it for his practice, it was
necessary for me to tell him the persons of whom I have gathered
the several perticulars which I there insist on. I would have made
excuses in it; but seeing him so earnest init, Ifound myself forced to
it; and so did tell him Mr. Pierce the surgeon in that of his low living
being discoursed of at Court — a maid-servant that I kept that lived
at Chelsy school, and also Mr. Pickering, about the report touching
325
the young woman; and also Mr. Hunt in axe yard, near whom she
lodged. I told him the whole City doth discourse concerning his
neglect of business; and so I many times asserting my dutiful
intention in all this, and he owning his accepting of it as such. That
that troubled me most in perticular is that he did there assert the
civility of the people of the house and the young gentlewoman, for
whose reproach he was sorry. I could not forbear weeping before
him at the latter end; which since I am ashamed of, though I cannot
see what he can take it to proceed from but my tenderness and good
will to him. After this discourse was ended, he begun to talk very
cheerfully of other things, and I walked with him to Whitehall and
we discoursed of the pictures in the gallery; which, it may be, he
might do out of policy, that the boy might not see any strangeness
in him; but I rather think that his mind was somewhat eased, and
hope that he will be to me as he was before. At Chappell Ihad room
in the Privy Seale pew with other gentlemen, and there heard Dr.
Killigrew preach; but my mind was so, I know not whether
troubled or only full of thoughts of what had passed between my
Lord and me, that I could not mind it nor can at this hour remember
three words; the Anthemne was good after sermon, being the 51
psalme—made for five voices by one of Capt. Cookes boys, a pretty
boy — and they say there are four or five of them that can do as
much. And here | first perceived that the King isa little Musicall,
and kept good time with his hand all along the Anthem. Thence Ito
the Kings head ordinary and there dined; good and much company
and a good dinner; most of their discourse was about hunting, ina
dialect Iunderstood very little. Thence by coach to our own church;
and there, my mind being yet unsettled, I could mind nothing; and
after sermon home and there told my wife what had passed; and
thence to my office, where doing business only to keep my mind
imployed till late; and so home to supper, to prayers and to bed.