1663-12-11

To'the Coffee-house and there, among others, had good
discourse with an Iron-merchant, who tells me the great evil of
discouraging our natural manufacture of England in that comm-
odity by suffering the Swede to bring in three times more then ever
they did, and our own Ironworkes be lost — as almosthalf of them,
he says, are already. Then I went and sat by Mr. Harrington and
some East Country merchants; and talking of the country about
Quinsborough' and thereabouts — he told us himself that for fish,
none there, the poorest body, will buy a dead fish; but must be
alive, unless it be in winter; and then they told us the manner of
putting their nets into the water through holes made in the thicke
Ice; they will spread a net of halfa mile long, and he hath known 130
and 170 barrells of fish taken at one draught. And then the people
comes with Sledges upon the Ice, with snow at the Bottome, and
lay the fish in and cover them with snow, and so carry them to
market. And he hath seen when the said fish have been frozen in the
sled, so as that he hath takena
fish and broke a-pieces, so hard it hath
been; and yet the same fishes, taken out of the snow and brought
into a hot room, will be alive and leap up and down. Swallow often
are brought up in their nets out of the mudd from under water,
hanging together to some twigg or other, dead in ropes; and
brought to the fire, will come to life. Fowl killed in December (Ald.
Barker said) he did buy; and putting into the box under his sled, did
forget to take them out to eate till Aprill next, and they then were
found there and were, through the frost, as sweet and fresh and eat
as well as at first killed. Young Beares are there; their flesh sold in
I. K6nigsberg, East Prussia.
330
market as ordinarily as beef here, and is excellent sweet meat. They
tell us that Beares there do never hurt anybody, but fly away from
you unless you pursue and set upon them — but Wolves do much
mischief. Mr. Harrington told us how they do to get so much
honey as they send abroad. They make hallow agreat Firr tree,
leaving only a small slitt down straight in one place; and this they
close up again, only leavea little hole and there the Bees go in and
fill the bodies of these trees as full of wax and honey as they can
hold; and the inhabitants at their times go and open that slit and take
what they please, without killing the bees, and so let them live there
still and make more. Firr trees are always planted close together,
because of keeping one another from the violence of the windes;
and when 2 fellet is made, they leave here and there a grown tree to
preserve the young ones coming up. The great entertainment and
sport of the Duke of Corland and the princes thereabouts is
hunting; which is not with dogs as we, but he appoints such a day
and summons all the country people as to a Campagnia, and by
several companies gives every one their circuit, and they agree upon
a place where the Toyle is to be set; and so, making fires every
company as they go, they drive all the wild beast — whether bears —
wolfe, foxes, Swine, and stags and rowes, into the Toyle; and there
the great men have their stands in such and such places and shoot at
what they have a mind to, and that is their hunting. They are not
very populous there, by reason that people marry women seldom
till they are towards or above 30; and men 30 or 40, or more
oftentimes, year old. Against a public hunting, the Duke sends that
no wolfes be killed by the people; and whatever harm they do, the
Duke makes it good to the person that suffers it—as Mr. Harrington
instanced in a house where he lodged, where a wolfe broke into a
hog-stye and bit three or four great pieces off of the back of the hog
before the house could come to help it (it crying, and that did give
notice to the people of the house); and the man of the house told him
that there was three or four wolfs thereabouts that did them great
hurt; but it was no matter, for the Duke was to make it good to him,
otherwise he could kill them.