1663-07-26

Lords day. Up and to the Wells, where great store of Citizens;
which was the greatest part of the company, though there were
some others of better Quality. I met many that I knew; and we
drunk each of us two pots and so walked away —it being very
pleasant to see how everybody turns up his tail, here one and there
another, in a bush, and the women in their Quarters the like.
Thence I walked Creede to Mr. Minnes’s house, which hath now a
good way made to it, and finely walled round; and thence to
Durdans and walked round it and within the Courtyard and to the
bowling-green, where I have seen so much mirth in my time; but
now no family in it (my Lord Barkely, whose it is, being with his
family at London); and so up and down by Minnes’s wood, with
great pleasure viewing my old walks and where Mrs. Hely andI did
use to walk and talk, with whom I had the first sentiments of love
and pleasure in woman’s company, discourse and taking her by the
hand ~she being a pretty woman. So Iled him to Ashted church (by
296
the place where Peter, my cosens man, went blindfold and found a
certain place we chose for him upon a wager) where we hada dull
Doctor, one Downe, worse then I think ever Parson King was (of
whom we made so much scorn); and after sermon home and stayed
while our dinner, a couple of large Chickens, were dressed and a
good mess of Creame — which anon we had with good content.
And after dinner he and I to walk; and I led him to the pretty little
wood behind my Cosen’s house, into which we got at last by
clambering and our little dog with us; but when we were in among
the Hazletrees and bushes, Lord, what a course did we run for an
hour together, losing ourselfs; and endeed, Idespaired Ishould ever
come to any path, but still from thicket to thicket — a thing I could
hardly have believed a man could have been lost so long in so small a
room. At last, I found out a delicate walk in the middle that goes
quite through the wood; and then went out of the wood and
hallowed Mr. Creede and made him hunt me from place to place;
and at last went in and called him into my fine walk — the little dog
still hunting with us through the wood. In this walk, being all
bewildred and weary and sweating, Creed, he lay down upon the
ground; whichI
did alittle but durst not long, but walked from him
in the fine green walk, which is half'a mile long, there reading my
vowes as I used to on Sundays. To Yowel and there set up our
horses and selfs for all night.