1663-09-31

This noon came Jane Gentleman to serve my wife as her
chambermaid; I wish she may prove well; she is only thick of
hearing, which may be a trouble, but we know not yet, nor is it
always so much as at other times. So ends this month, with my
mind pretty well in quiet, and in good disposition of health since
my drinking at home ofalittle wine with my beer; but nowhere else
do I drink any wine at all. My house in a way to be clean again, the
Joyners and all having done; but only we lack a Cooke-maid and
Jane our chambermaid is but new come to us this day. The King and
Queene and the Court at the Bath. My Lord Sandwich in the
country, newly gone, with my doubts concerning him having been
debauched by aslut at his lodgings at Chelsy. My brother John with
me, but not to my great content, because I do not see him mind his
study or give me so good account thereof as Iexpected. My Brother
305
1663 31 August—4 September
Tom embarqued in building, andI fear in no good condition for it,
for he sent to me to borrow more money, which I shall not lend
him. Myself in good condition in the office, and I hope in a good
way of saving of money at home.
—~*SEPTEMBER?-
1. Inthe evening, my brother John coming to me to complain that
my wife seems to be discontented at his being here and shows him
great disrespect; so I took and walked with him in the garden and
discoursed long with him about my affairs, and how imprudent it is
for my father and mother and him to take exceptions without great
cause at my wife, considering how much it concerns them to keep
her their friend, and for my peace; not that I would ever be led by
her to forget or desert them in the main, but yet she deserves to be
pleased and complied with alittle, considering the manner of life
that I keep her to and how convenient it were for me to have
Brampton for her to be sent to when Ihave a mind or occasion to go
abroad to Portsmouth or elsewhere about pleasure or business,
when it will not be safe for me to leave her alone. So directed him
how to behave himself to her, and gave him other counsel; and so to
my office, where late, and then home to supper and to bed.
3. To Deptford; and after a word or two with Sir J. Mennes,
walked to Redriffe and so home. In my way, it coming into my
head, overtaking of a beggar or two on the way that looked like
Gypsys, it came into my head what the Gypsys eight or nine days
ago had foretold, that somebody that day sennit should be with me
to borrow money, but I should lend none; and looking, when I
came to my office, upon my Journall, that my Brother John had
brought mealetter that day from my Brother Tom to borrow 201
more of me, which had vexed me so, that I had sent the letter to my
father into the country, to acquaint him of it. But it pleased me
mightily to see how, contrary to my expectation, having so lately
lent him 20/, and believe that he had money by him to spare, and
that after some days not thinking of it, I should look back and find
what the Gypsy had told me to be so true.
4. Made my wife get herself presently ready, and so carried her by
306
coach to [Bartholomew] fair and showed her the Munkys dancing
on the ropes; which was strange, but such dirty sport that I was not
pleased with it. There was also a horse with hoofes like Rams
hornes — a goose with four feet — and a cock with three. Thence to
another place and saw some German clockeworks, the Salutacion
of the Virgin Mary and several Scripture stories; but above all, there
was at last represented the Sea, with Neptune, Venus, mermaids,
and Cupid on a Dolphin, the sea rolling. Thence home by coach
with my wife, and I a while to the office; and so to supper and to
bed.