1663-06-06

Lay in bed till 7 a-clock, yet rise with an opinion that it was not
5; and so continued, though I heard the clock strike, till noon and
could not believe that it was so late as it truly was. I was hardly ever
so mistaken in my life before. Up and to Sir G. Carteret at his house
and spoke to him about business; but he being in a bad humour, I
had no mind to stay with him, but walked (drinking my morning
draught of Whey by the way) to Yorke house, where the Russia
Embassador doth lie; and there I saw his people go up and down
louseing themselfs; they are all in a great hurry, being to be gone the
beginning of next week. By and by comes Sir John Hebden the
Russia Resident to me, and he and IJ in his coach to Whitehall to
Secretary Morrices, to see the orders about the Russia Hemp that is
to be fetched from Archangell for our King; and that being done, to
coach again and he brought me into the City; and so I home, and
after dinner abroad by water and met by appointment Mr. Deane in
the Temple church; and he and I over to Mr. Blackburys yard and
thence to other places; and after that, to.a drinking house; in all
which places Idid so practise and improve my measuring of timber,
that I can now do it with great ease and perfection, which doth
please me mightily. This fellow Deane is a conceited fellow and one
that means the King a great deal of service, more of disservice to
other people that go away with profits which he cannot make; but
however, I learn much of him and he is, I perceive, of great use to
284
the King in his place, and so I shall give him all the encouragement I
can. Hebden did today in the coach tell me how he is vexed to see
things at Court ordered as they are; by nobody that attends
business, but every man himself or his pleasures. He cries up my
Lord Ashley to be almost the only man that he sees to look after
business; and with that ease and mastery that he wonders at him. He
cries out against the King’s dealing so much with goldsmiths, and
suffering himself to have his purse kept and commanded by them.
He tells me also with what exact care and order the States of
Hollands stores are kept in their Yards, and everything managed
there by their builders with such husbandry as is not imaginable —
whichI will endeavour to understand further, ifI can by any means
learn.