1663-01-31

Mr. Povy and I to Whitehall, he carrying me thither on
purpose to carry me into the Ball this night before the King. All the
way, he talking very ingenuously; and I find him a fine gentleman
and one that loves to live nobly and neatly, as I perceive by his
discourse of his house, pictures, and horses. He brought me first to
the Duke’s chamber, where I saw him and the Duchesse at supper,
and thence into the room where the Ball was to be, crammed with
245
1662 31 December
fine ladies, the greatest of the Court. By and by comes the King and
Queen, the Duke and Duchesse, and all the great ones; and after
seating themselfs, the King takes out the Duchess of Yorke, and the
Duke the Duchesse of Buckingham, the Duke of Monmouth my
Lady Castlemayne, and so other lords other ladies; and they danced
the Bransle. After that, the King led a lady a single Coranto; and
then the rest of the lords, one after another, other ladies. Very noble
it was, and great pleasure to see. Then to Country dances; the King
leading the first which he called for; which was— says he, Cuckolds
all a-row, the old dance of England. Of the ladies that danced, the
Duke of Monmouth’s mistress and my Lady Castlemayne and a
daughter of Sir Harry De Vickes were the best. The manner was,
when the King dances, all the ladies in the room, and the Queen
herself, stands up; and endeed he dances rarely and much better then
the Duke of Yorke. Having stayed here as long as I thought fit, to
my infinite content, it being the greatest pleasure I could wish now
to see at Court, I went out, leaving them dancing.
Thus ended this year, with great mirth to me and my wife. Our
condition being thus — we are at present spending a night or two at
my Lord’s lodgings at Whitehall. Our home at the Navy office —
which is and hath a pretty while been in good condition, finished
and made very convenient. My purse is worth about 6501 — besides
my goodsofall sorts— which yet might have been more but for my
late layings-out upon my house and public assessment, and yet
would not have been so much ifI had not lived a very orderly life all
this year, by virtue of the oaths that God put into my heart to take
against wine, plays, and other expenses, and to observe for these
last twelve months — and which I am now going to renew, I under
God oweing my present content therunto. My family* is myself
and wife— Wm. my clerk—Jane, my wife’s upper-maid; but I think
growing proud and negligent upon it, we must part; which troubles
me — Susan our cook-maid, a pretty willing wench but no good
cook — and Waynman my boy, who I am now turning away for his
naughty tricks. We have had from the beginning our hea!ths to this
day, very well, blessed be God. Our late mayde Sarah going from
us (though put away by us) to live with Sir W. Penn doth trouble
me, though I love the wench — so that we do make ourselfs a little
strange to him and his family for it, and resolve to do so. We have
lately had it in our thoughts, and I can hardly bring myself off of it
since Mrs. Gosnell cannot be with us, to find out another to be in
the quality ofa Woman to my wife, that can sing or dance. And yet
246
31 December 1662
finding it hard to save anything at the year’s end as I now live, I
think I shall not be such a fool — till 1am more warm in my purse;
besides my oath of entering into no such expenses till I am worth
10001. By my last year’s diligence in my office, blessed be God, Iam
come to a good degree of knowledge therein; and am acknow-
ledged so by all the world, even the Duke himself, to whom Ihavea
good accesse, and by that and my being Comissioner with him for
Tanger, he takes much notice of me, and I doubt not but by the
continuance of the same endeavours I shall ina
little time come to be
a man much taken notice of in the world-— especially, being come to
so great an esteem with Mr. Coventry. The only weight that lies
heavy upon my mind is the ending the business with my uncle
Thomas about my dead uncles estate, which is very ill on our side;
andI fear, when all is done, I must be forced to maintain my father
myself, or spare a good deal towards it out of my own purse —
which will be a very great pull-backe to me in my fortune. But I
must be contented and bring it to an issue one way or other.
Public matters stand thus. The King is bringing, as is said, his
family and Navy and all other his charges to a less expense. In the
meantime, himself fallowing his pleasures more then with good
advice he would do —at least, to be seen to all the world to do so—his
dalliance with my Lady Castlemayne being public every day, to his
great reproach. And his favouring of none at Court so much as
those that are the confidants of his pleasure as Sir H. Bennet and Sir
_ Ch. Barkely — which good God put it into his heart to mend -
before he makes himself too much contemned by his people for it.
The Duke of Monmouth is in so great splendour at Court and so
dandled by the King, that some doubt, if the King should have no
child by the Queene (which there is yet no appearance of),whether
he would not be acknowledged for a lawful son. And that there will
a difference fallow upon it between the Duke of York — and him —
which God prevent. My Lord Chancellor is threatened by people to
be Questioned, the next sitting of the parliament, by some spirits
that do not love to see him so great. But certainly he is a good
servant to the King. The Queene Mother is said to keep too great a
Court now; and her being married to my Lord St. Albans is
commonly talked of, and that they had a daughter between them in
France. How true, God knows.’ The Bishopps are high and go on
without any diffidence in pressing uniformity; and the Presbyters
1. See above, pp. 235—6 (22 November) & n.
247
1662 31 December
seem silent in it and either conform or lay down, though without
doubt they expect a turn and would be glad these endeavours of the
other Fanatiques would take effect — there having beena plot lately
found, for which four have been publicly tried at the old Bayly and
hanged. My Lord Sandwich is still in good esteem, and now
keeping his Christmas in the country. And I in good esteem, I
think, as any man can be with him. In fine, for the good condition
of myself, wife, family and estate, in the great degree that it is, and
for the public state of the nation, so quiet as it is, the Lord God be
praised.
248
we
6 cosBe
te
—% JANUARY#-
1. Lay with my wife at my Lord’s lodgings, where I have been
these two nights, till ro a-clock with great pleasure talking; and
then I rose. And to Whitehall, where I spenta little time walking
among the Courtiers, which I perceive I shall be able to do with
great confidence, being now beginning to be pretty well-known
among them. Then to my wife again and dined, Mrs. Sarah with
us, in the chamber we lay in. Among other discourse, Mrs. Sarah
tells us how the King sups at least four or [five] times every week
with my Lady Castlemayne; and most often stays till the morning
with her and goes home through the garden all alone privately, and
that so as the very Centry’s take notice of it and speakofit. She tells
me that about a month ago she quickened at my Lord Gerrards at
dinner and cried out that she was undone; and all the lords and men
were fain to quit the room, and women called to help her. In fine, I
find that there is nothing almost but bawdry at Court from top to
bottom, as if it were fit I could instance, but it is not necessary.
Only, they say my Lord Chesterfield, Groom of the Stole to the
Queene, is either gone or put away from Court upon the score of
his lady’s having smitten the Duke ofYork, so as that he is watched
by the Duchesse of Yorke and the lady is retired into the country
upon it. How much of this is true, God knows, but it is common
talk. After dinner Idid reckon with Mrs. Sarah for what we have eat
and drank here, and gave her a crowne; and so took coach and to the
Duke’s house, where we saw The Villaine again; and the more I see
it, the more Iam offended at my first undervaluing the play, it being
very good and pleasant and yet a true and allowable Tragedy. The
house was full of Citizens and so the less pleasant, but that I was
willing to make an end of my gaddings and to set to my business for
all the year again tomorrow.
4. Lords day. Up and to church, where a lazy sermon. And so
home to dinner to a good piece of powdered beef, buta little too
249
salt. At dinner my wife did propound my having of my sister Pall at
my house again to be her Woman, since one we must have — hoping
that in that quality possibly she may prove better than she did
before. Which I take very well of her, and will consider of it — it
being a very great trouble to me that I should haveasister of so ill a
nature that I must be forced to spend money upona stranger, when
it might better be upon her if she were good for anything.