1663-08-31

Upearely to my accounts this month; andI find myself worth
clear 7301 — the most I ever had yet; which contents me, though I
encrease but very little. To the Exchange, where I met Dr. Pierce,
who tells mé as a friend, the great Injury that he thinks I do myself
by being so Severe in the yards, and contracting the ill will of the
whole Navy for those offices singly upon myself. Now I discharge
298
31 July—5 August 1663
a good conscience therein, andI tell him that no man can (nor doth
he say any say it) charge me with doing wrong; but rather do as
many good offices as any man. However, | will make use of his
counsel and take some Course to prevent having the single ill will of
the office. Before I went to the office, I went to the Coffee-house
where Sir J. Cutler and Mr. Grant came. And there Mr. Grant
showed me letters of Sir Wm. Pettys, wherein he says that his vessel
which he hath built upon two Keeles (a modell whereof, built for
the King, he showed me) hath this month won a wager of sol in
sailing between Dublin and Holyhead with the pacquett-boat, the
best ship or vessel the King hath there. In their coming back from
Holyhead, they started together; and this vessel came to Dublin by
5 at night and the pacquet-boat not before 8 the next morning; and
when they came they did believe that this vessel had been drownded
or at least behind, not thinking she could have lived in that sea. To
bed — ending the month with pretty good content of mind. My wife
in the country — and myself in good esteem and likely by pains to
become considerable I think, with God’s blessing upon my
diligence.
~%&AUGUST
4+
4. To Westminster hall; and not finding Mrs. Lane, with whom I
purposed to be merry, I went to Jervas’s and took him and his wife
over the water to their mother Palmers (the woman that speaks in
the belly and with whom I had two or three years ago so good sport
with Mr. Mallard), thinking, because I had heard that she is a
woman of that sort, that I might there have light upon some lady of
pleasure (for which God forgive me); but blessed be God, there was
none nor anything that pleased me — but a poor little house which
she hath set out as fine as she can. And for her singing which she
pretends to, is only some old bawdy songs, and those sung
abominably; only, she pretends to be able to sing both bass and
treble; which she doth, something like but not like what I thought
formerly and expected now. Nor doth her speaking in her belly
take me now as it did then, but it may be that is because I know it
and see her mouth when she speaks, which should not be.
5. All the morning at the office; whither Deane of Woolwich
299
came to me and discoursed of the body of ships, which I am now
going about to understand. And then I took him to the Coffee-
house, where he was very earnest against Mr. Grant’s report in
favour of Sir W. Petty’s vessel, even to some passion on both sides
almost. So to the Exchange, and thence home to dinner with my
brother. And in the afternoon to Westminster hall and there found
Mrs. Lane; and by and by, by agreement, we met at the parliament-
stairs (in my [way] down to the boat, who should meet us but my
Lady Jemimah, who saw me lead her but said nothing to me ofher,
thoughI stayed to speak to her to see whether she would take notice
of
it or no) andoff to Stangate; and so to the Kingshead at Lambeth
marsh and had variety of meats and drink; come to xs. But I did so
towse her and handled her; but could get nothing more from her,
though I was very near it. But as wanton and bucksome as she is,
she dares not adventure upon that business — in which I very much
commend and like her. Stayed pretty late, and so over with her by
water; and being in a great sweat with my towsing of her, I durst
not go home by water, but took coach. And at home, my brother
and I fell upon Des Cartes, and I perceive he hath studied him well
and I cannot find but he hath minded his book and doth love it. This
evening camealetter about business from Mr. Coventry, and with
it a Silver pen he promised me, to carry inke in; which is very
necessary. So to prayers and to bed.