1663-04-21

Up betimes and to my office, where busy all the morning.
And at noon, after a little dinner, to it again; and by and by, by
264
21 March—3 April 1663
appointment, our full board met, and Sir Phillip Warwicke and Sir
Robt. Long came from my Lord Treasurer to speak with us about
the state of the debts of the Navy and how to settle it, so as to begin
upon the new Foundacion of 200000! per annum which the King is
now resolved not to exceed.
25. Lady day. This evening came Capt. Grove about hiring ships
for Tanger. I did hint to him my desire that I could make some
lawfull profit thereof— which he promises, that he will tell me of all
that he gets and that I shall have a share — which I did not demand,
but did silently consent to it—and money, Iperceive something will
be got thereby. At night Mr. Bland came and sat with me at my
office till late, and so I home and to bed. This day being washing-
day and my maid Susan ill, or would be thought so, puts my house
so out of order that we have no pleasure almost in anything, my
wife being troubled thereat for want of a good cook-maid.
26. Up betimes and to my office — leaving my wife in bed to take
her physique; myself also not being out of some pain today, by
some cold that I have got by the sudden changeof the weather from
hot to cold. This day is five years since it pleased God to preserve
me at my being cut of the Stone; of which, I bless God, I am in all
respects well — only, now and then upon taking cold I have some
pain, but otherwise in very good health alway. But I could not get
my feast to be keeped today as it used to be, because of my wife’s
being ill and other disorders by my servants being out of order.
This morning came a new Cooke-maid at 4/ per annum, the first
time I ever did give so much —
but we do hope it will be nothing lost
by keeping a good cook. She did live last at my Lord Monkes
house. And endeed, at dinner did get what there was very prettily
ready and neat for me, which did please me much.
-&APRILL4-
3. Going out of Whitehall, I met Capt. Grove, who did give mea
letter directed to myself from himself; I discerned money to be in it
and took it, knowing, as I found it to be, the proceed of the place I
have got him, to have the taking up of vessells for Tanger. But I did
not open it till I came home to my office; and there I broke it open,
265
not looking into it till all the money was out, that I might say I saw
no money in the paper if ever I should be Questioned about it.
There was a piece in gold and 41 in silver. So home to dinner with
my father and wife. And after dinner up to my Tryangle, where I
find that above my expectation Ashwell hath very good principles
of Musique and can take outa lesson herself with very little pains —
at which I am very glad. Thence away back again by water to
Whitehall and there to the Tanger Committee, where we find
ourselfs at a great stand — the establishment being but 7oo0ol per
annum — and the forces to be kept in the town, at the least estimate
that my Lord Rutherford can be got to bring it, is 53000/. The’
charge of this year’s work of the Molle will be 13000/ — besides roool
a year to my Lord Peterburgh as a pension, and the fortificacions
and contingencys — which puts us to a great stand.