1663-12-29

Lords day. This morning I put on my best black cloth-suit
trimmed with Scarlett ribbon, very neat, with my cloak lined with
Velvett and a new Beaver, which altogether is very noble, with my
black silk knit canons I bought a month ago. I to church alone, my
wife not going; and there I find my Lady Batten in a velvet gowne,
which vexed me that she should be in it before my wife, or that lam
able to put her into one; but what cannot be, cannot be. However,
when I came home I told my wife ofit; and to see my weakness, I
could on the sudden have found my heart to have offered her one,
but second thoughts put it by; and endeed, it would undo me to
think of doing as Sir W. Batten and his Lady do, who hath a good
327
1663 29 November—6 December
estate besides his office. A good dinner we had of beufa la mode, but
not dressed so well as my wife used to do it. So after dinner I to the
French church; but that being too far begun, I came back to St.
Dunstans by us, and heard a good sermon and so home.
~#DECEMBER#-
2. My wife troubled all last night with the toothake, and this
morning. I up and to my office, where busy; and so home to dinner
with my wife, who is better of her teeth then she was. And in the
afternoon by agreement called on by Mr. Bland, and with him to
the Ship,’a neighbour tavern and there met his Antagonist Mr.
Custos and his referee Mr. Clerke, a merchant also, and begun the
dispute about the freight of a ship hired by Mr. Bland to carry
provisions to Tanger, and the freight is now demanded; whereas,
he says that the goods were some spoiled, some not delivered; and
upon the whole, demands 1300/ of the other. And their minds are
both so high, their demands so distant, and their words so many
and hot against one another, that I fear we shall bring it to nothing.
But however, I am glad to see myself so capable of understanding
the business as I find I do, and shall endeavour to do Mr. Bland all
the just service I can therein. Here we were in a bad room, which
vexed me most; but we meet at another house next. So at noon I
home and to my office till 9 a-clock; and so home to my wife to keep
her company; Arithmetique; then to supper and to bed — she being
well of her teeth again.
4th. Up pretty betimes; that is, about 7 a-clock, it being now dark
then. And so got me ready with my clothes, breeches and warm
stockings, and by water with Henry Russell, cold and wet and
windy, to Woolwich to a hemp ship there; and stayed looking upon
it and giving direction as to the getting it ashore, and so back again,
very cold; and at home, without going on shore anywhere, about
12 a-clock, being fearful of taking cold. And’so dined at home—and
shifted myself, and so all the afternoon at my office till night, and
then home to keep my poor wife company; and so to supper and to
bed.
6. Lords day. Lay long in bed; and then up and to church alone
328
(which is the greatest trouble that I have, by not having a man or
boy to wait on me) and so home to dinner; my wife, it being a cold
day and it begin to snow (the first snow we have seen this year),
kept her bed till after dinner. And I below by myself looking over
my arithmetique books and Timber Rule. So my wife rise anon,
and she and I all the afternoon at Arithmetique; and she is come to
do Addicion, Substraccion and Multiplicacion very well —and so I
purpose not to trouble her yet with Division, but to begin with the
globes to her now. At night I to my office and spent an hour or two
reading Rushworth; and so to supper home, and to prayers and bed
~ finding myself by cold to have some pain begin with me, which
God defend should encrease.