1663-09-09

To Whitehall to Sir G. Carterets, but did not speak with him;
and so to Westminster hall, God forgive me, thinking to meet Mrs.
Lane, but she was not there; but here I met with Ned Pickering,
with whom I walked three or four hours till evening, he telling me
the whole business of my Lord’s folly with this Mrs. Becke at
Chelsy, of all which I am ashamed to see my Lord so grossly play
the beast and fool, to the flinging off ofall Honour, friends, servants
1. See above, p. 203, n.
307
1663 g—11 September
and every thing and person that is good, and only will have his
private lust undisturbed with this common whore ~ his sitting up,
night after night alone, suffering nobody to come to them, and all
the day too.
10. Up betimes and to my office. And then sat all the morning,
making a great contract with Sir W. Warren for 3000! worth of
Masts; but good God, to see what a man might do were I a knave—
the whole business, from beginning to the end, being done by me
outof the office, and signed to by them upon but once readingofit
to them, without the least care or consultation either of quality,
price, number, or needof them, only in general that it was good to
havea store. But Ihope my pains was such as the King hath the best
bargain of Masts hath been bought these 27 years in this office.
Dined at home and then to my office again, many people about
business with me. And then stepped a
little abroad about business to
the Wardrobe, but missed Mr. Moore, and elsewhere. And in my
way met Mr. Moore, who tells me of the good peace that is made at
Tanger with the Moores, but to continue from six months to six
months. And that the Molle is laid out and likely to be done with
great ease and successe.
11. This morning, about 2 or 3 a-clock, knocked up in our
backyard; and rising to the window, being moonshine, I find it was
the Constable and his watch, who had found our backyard door
open and so came in to see what the matter was. So Idesired them to
shut the door and bid them good-night. And so to bed again. And at
6 a-clock up and a while to my vyall, and then to the office, where
all the morning upon the victuallers account and then with him to
dinner to the Dolphin, where I eat well but drunk no wine neither,
which keeps me in such good order that Iam mightily pleased with
myself for it. Hither Mr. Moore came to me, and he and Ihome and
advised about business; and so after an hour’s examining the state of
the Navy debts lately cast up, I took coach to Sir Ph. Warwickes;
but finding Sir G. Carteret there, I did not go in, but directly home
again, it raining hard — having first of all been with Creed and Mrs.
Harper about a cook-maid, and am like to have one from Creede’s
lodging. In my way home visited my Lord Crew and Sir Tho.,
thinking they might have enquired by the by of me, touching my
Lord’s matters at Chelsey, but they said nothing; and so after some
slight common talk, I bid them good-night. At home to my office;
308
and after a while doing business, home to supper — and bed.