1663-11-18

This morning I sent Will with my great letter of reproof to my
Lord Sandwich, who did give it into his own hand.
My Lord.
I do verily hope that neither the manner nor matter of this advice
322
18 November 1663
will be condemned by your Lordshipp, when for my defence in the
first I shall allege my double attempt (since your return from
Hinchingbrooke) of doing it personally, in both of which your
Lordships occasions, no doubtfulness of mine prevented me. And
that being now fearful of a sudden summons to Portsmouth for the
discharge of some ships there, Ijudge it very unbecoming the duty
which (every bit of bread I eat tells me) | owe to your Lordshipp to
expose the safety of your Honour to the uncertainty of my return.
For the matter (my Lord), it is such as could I in any measure think
safe to conceal from, or likely to be discovered to you by any other
hand, I should not have dared so far to own what from my heart I
believe is false, as to make myself but the relater of others discourse.
But, Sir, your Lordships honour being such as I ought to value it to
be, and finding both in City and Court that discourses pass to your
prejudice, too generally for mine or any man’s controlling but your
Lordships, I shall (my Lord), without the least greatening or
lessening the matter, do my duty in laying it shortly before you.
People of all conditions (my Lord) raise matter of wonder from
your Lordships so little appearance at Court — some concluding
thence your disfavour there. To which purpose I have had
Questions asked me; and endeavouring to put off such insinuacions
by asserting the contrary, they have replied that your Lordships
living so beneath your Quality, out of the way and declining of
Court attendance, hath been more then once discoursed about the
King. Others (my Lord), when the chief Ministers of State, and
those most active of the Council have been reckoned up (wherein
your Lordship never use to want an eminent place), have said,
touching your Lordshipp, that now your turn was served and the
King had given you a good estate, you left him to stand or fall as he
would. And, perticularly in that of the Navy, have enlarged upon
your letting fall all service there. Another sort (and those the most)
insist upon the bad report of the house wherein your Lordship (now
observed in perfect health again) continues to sojourne. And by
name have charged one of the daughters for a common Courtizan,
alleging both places and persons where and with whom she hath
been too well known. And how much her wantonness occasions
(though unjustly) scandal to your Lordship; and that as well to
gratifying of some enemies as to the wounding of more friends, I
am not able to tell. Lastly (my Lord), I find a general coldness in all
persons towards your Lordship; such as, from my first dependence
on you, I never yet knew. WhereinI shall not offer to interpose any
323
thoughts or advice of mine, well knowing your Lordship needs not
any. But, with a most faithful assurance that no person nor papers
under Heaven is privy to what Ihere write, besides myself and this,
which I shall be careful to have put into your own hands, I rest
confident of your Lordships just construction of my dutiful intents
herein, and in all humility take leave.
May it please your Lordship, Your Lordships most obedient
servant,
S:PeNov.-17. 1663:
Memorandum. The letter beforegoing was sent sealed up, and
enclosed in this that fallows.
My Lord.
Ifthis finds your Lordshipp either not alone or not at leisure, Ibeg
the suspending your opening of the enclosed till you shall be both —
(the matter very well bearing such a delay) and in all humility
remain.
May it please your Lordshipp, Your Lordshipps most obedient
servant,
S.P. Nov. 17.1663.
My servant hath my directions to put this into your Lordships own
hand, but not to stay for any answer.