1663-02-08

Lords day. Up; and it being a very great frost, I walked to
Whitehall and to my Lord Sandwiches; by the fireside till chapel
time and so to chapel, where there preached little Dr. Duport of
Cambrige upon Josiahs words, “But I and my house, we will serve
the Lord.”’ But though a great scholar, he made the most flat, dead
sermon, both for matter and manner of delivery, that ever I heard;
and very long beyond his hour, which made it worse. And then
Creede and I and Capt. Ferrers to the parke — and there walked
finely, seeing people slide — we talking all the while and Capt.
Ferrers telling me, among other Court passages — how about a
month ago, at a Ball at Court, a child was dropped by one of the
ladies in dancing; but nobody knew who, it being taken up by
somebody in their handkercher. The next morning all the Ladies of
Honour appeared early at Court for their vindication, so that
nobody could tell whose this mischance should be. But it seems
Mrs. Wells fell sick that afternoon and hath disappeared ever since,
so that it is concluded it was her. Another story was how my Lady
Castlemayne, a few days since, had Mrs. Stuart to an entertain-
ment, and at night begun a frolique that they two must be married,
and married they were, with ring and all other ceremonies of
257
church service, and ribbands and a sack-posset in bed and flinging
the stocking. But in the close, it is said that my Lady Castlemayne,
who was the bridegroom, rose, and the King came and took her
place with pretty Mrs. Stuart. This is said to be very true. Whether
the wind and the cold did cause it or no, I know not; but having
been this day or two mightily troubled with an iching all over my
body, which I took to be a louse or two that might bite me -I find
this afternoon that all my body is inflamed and my face in a sad
redness and swelling and pimpled; so that Iwas, before we had done
walking, not only sick but ashamed of myself to see myself so
changed in my countenance; so that after we had thus talked, we
parted and I walked home with much ado, the ways being so full of
ice and water by people’s trampling. At last got home and to bed
presently and had a very bad night oft, in great pain in my stomach
and great fever.