1663-05-22

Up pretty betimes; and shall I hope come to myself and
business again after a small playing the truant, for I find that my
interest and profit do grow daily, for which God be praised and
276
keep me to my duty. To my office. And anon one tells me that
Rundall the house-carpenter of Deptford hath sent me a fine
Blackebird — which Iwent to see. He tells me he was offered 20s. for
him as he came along, he doth so whistle. So to my office, and busy
all the morning. Among other things, learning to understand the
course of the tides, and I think I do now do it. At noon Mr. Creede
comes to me, and he and I to the Exchange, where I had much
discourse with several merchants; and so home with him to dinner
and then by water to Greenwich; and calling at the little alehouse at
the end of the town to wrap a rag about my little left toe, being new-
sore with walking, we walked pleasantly to Woolwich, in our way
hearing the Nightingales sing. So to Woolwich yard; and after
doing many things there, among others preparing myself for a
dispute against Sir W. Penn in the business of Bewpers, wherein he
is guilty of some corruption to the King’s wrong, we walked back
again without drinking there; which I never do, because I would
not make my coming troublesome to any, nor would become
obliged too much to any. Going back, took boat at Greenwich and
to Deptford, where I did the same thing and find Davis, the
Storekeeper, a knave and shuffling in the business of Bewpers,
being of the party with Young and Whistler to abuse the King; but I
hope I shall be even with them. So walked to Redriffe, drinking at
the Halfway house; and so walk and by water to Whitehall, all our
way by water, both coming and going, readinga
little book said to
be writ by a person of Quality concerning English Gentry to be
preferred before Titular honours; but the most silly nonsense, no
sense nor grammar, yet in as good words that ever I saw in all my
life, that from beginning to end you meet not with one entire and
regular sentence.