1664-11-29

Up; and it being my Lord Mayor’s show, my boy and three
maids went out; but it being a very foul rainy day from morning to
night, I was sorry my wife let them go out. All the morning at the
office. At dinner at home. In the afternoon to the office again; and
about 4 a-clock by appointment to the Kings head tavern upon
Fishstreete hill, whither Mr. Wolfe (and Parham by his means) met
me to discourse about the Fishery; and a great light I had by
Parham, who isa little conceited but a very knowing man in his
437
1664 29 October—3 November
way, and in the general fishing trade of England. Here I stayed three
hours and eat a barrel of very fine oysters of Wolfes giving me; and
so it raining hard — home and to my office, and then home to bed.
30. Lords day. Up; and this morning put on my new fine coloured
cloth suit, with my cloak lined with plush — which is a dear and
noble suit, costing me about 17/. To church and then home to
dinner; and after dinner, toa little musique with my boy, and so to
church with my wife; and so home and with her all the evening,
reading and at musique with my boy with great pleasure; and so to
supper, prayers, and to bed.
a
~+NOVEMBER#-
1. Upand to the office, where busy all the morning. At noon (my
wife being invited to my Lady Sandwiches) all alone dined at home
upon a good goose with Mr. Wayth — discoursing of business.
Thence I to the committee of the Fishery and there we sat, with
several good discourses and some bad and simple ones and with
great disorder, and yet by the men of business of the town. But my
report in the business of the collections’ is mightily commended
and will get me some reputation; and endeed is the only thing looks
like a thing well done since we sat. Thence with Mr. Parham to the
tavern, but I drank no wine; only, he did give me another barrel of
oysters. And he brought one Maj. Greene, an able fishmonger, and
good discourse to my information. So home and late at business at
my office. Then to supper and to bed.
2. Up betimes, and down with Mr. Castle to Redriffe, and there
walked to Deptford to view a parcel of brave Knees of his, which
endeed are very good. And so back again —- home —I seeming very
friendly to him, though Iknow him to bea rogue and one that hates
me with his heart. Home and to dinner, and so to my office all the
afternoon, where in some pain in my backe, which troubled me;
but I think it comes only with stooping and from no other matter.
3. Up, and to the office — where strange to see how Sir W. Penn is
1. See above, p. 435 (25 October).
438
flocked to by people ofall sorts against his going to sea. At the office
did much business; among other, an end of that that hath troubled
me long, the business of Bewpers and Flaggs. At noon to the
Change; and thence by appointment was met with Bagwells wife,
and she fallowed me into Moorefields and there into a drinking-
house — and all alone eat and drank together. I did there caress her;
but though I did make some offer, did not receive any compliance
from her in what was bad, but very modestly she denied me; which
I was glad to see and shall value her the better for it — and I hope
never tempt her to any evil more.