1664-02-22

This evening came Mr. Alsopp the King’s Brewer, with
whomI spent an hour talking and bewailing the posture of things at
present. The King led away by half a dozen men, that none of his
serious servants and friends can come at him. These are Lodderdale,
Buckingham, Hamilton, Fitzharding, to whom he hath it seems
given 12000! per annum too, in the best part of the King’s estate
and that that the old Duke of Buckingham could never get of the
King. Projers is another, and Sir H. Bennett. He loves not the
Queen at all, but is rather sullen to her; and she by all reports
incapable of children. He is fond of the Duke of Monmouth that
everybody admires* it; and he says the Duke hath said that he
would be the death of any man that says the King was not married
to her! — though Alsopp says it is well known that she was a
common whore when the King lay with her. But it seems, he says,
that the King is mighty kind to these his bastard children and at this
day will go at midnight to my Lady Castlemaynes nurses and take
1. Monmouth’s mother, Lucy Walter.
353
1664 22 February
the child and dance it in his arms. That he is not likely to have his
tables up again in his house,' for the crew that are about him will
not have him come to common view again, but keep him obscurely
among themselfs. He hath this night, it seems, ordered that the hall
(which there is a ball to be in tonight before the King) be guarded, as
the Queen-mother’s is, by his Horse Guards; whereas heretofore
they were by the Lord Chamberlin or Steward and their people.
But it is feared they will reduce all to the soldiery, and all other
places taken away. And which is worst of all, that he will alter the
present militia and bring all to a flying army. That my Lord
Lodderdale, being middleton’s enemy and one that scores the
Chancellor, even to open affronts before the King, hath got the
whole power of Scottland into his hand; whereas the other day he
was in a fair way to have had his whole estate and honour and life
voted away from him. That all the Court are mad for a Dutch war;
but both he and I did concur that it was a thing rather to be dreaded
then hoped for—unless, by the French King’s falling upon Flanders,
they and the Dutch should be divided. That the talk which these
people about our King that I named before have, is to tell him how
neither privileges of Parliament nor City is anything; but his will is
all and ought to be so; and their discourse, it seems, when they are
alone, is so base and sordid that it makes the eares of the very
gentlemen of back-staires, I think he called them, to tingle to hear it
spoke in the King’s hearing — and that must be very bad endeed.
That my Lord Digby did send to Lisbon a couple of priests to search
out what they could against the Chancellor concerning the match,
as to the point of his knowing beforehand that she was not capable
of bearing children’ and that something was given her to make her
so. Ireland in a very distracted condition about the hard usage
which the protestants meet with, and the too good which the
catholiques. And from all together, God knows my heart, I expect
nothing but ruin can fallow, unless things are better ordered in a
little time.
He being gone, my wife came and told me how kind my uncle
Wight hath been to her today also; and that though she sees that all
his kindness to us comes from respect to her, she discovers nothing
but great civility from him; yet by what she says, he otherwise will
I. sc. will not dine in public in the palace.
2. Clarendon was said to have planned the King’s marriage to a barren Princess in
the dynastic interest of his daughter, the Duchess of York.
354
tell me. But today he told her plainly that had she a child it should be
his heire; and that should Ior she want, he would be a good friend to
us, and did give my wife instructions to consent to all his wife says
at any time, she being a pettish woman; which argues a design he
hath I think of keeping us in with his wife, in order to our good,
sure — and he declaring her jealousy of him, that so he dares not
come to see my wife as otherwise he would do and will endeavour
to do. It looks strange, putting all together; but yet I am in hopes he
means well. After all this discourse with my wife at my office alone,
she home to see how the wash goes on and I to make an end of my
work; and so home to supper and to bed.