1664-12-26

Upand with Sir W. Penn to Whitehall, and there with the rest
did our usual business before the Duke; and then with Sir W. Batten
back and to his house, where I by sickness excused my wife’s
coming to them today. Thence I to the Coffee-house, where much
good discourse; and all the opinion now is that the Duch will avoid
fighting with us at home but do all the hurt they can to us abroad —
which it may be they may for a while; but that I think cannot
support them long. Thence to Sir W. Batten, where Mr. Coventry
and all our families here, women and all, and Sir R. Ford and his.
And a great feast — and good discourse and merry. I here all the
afternoon and evening till late; only stepped in to see my wife. Then
to my office to enter my day’s work; and so home to bed, where my
people and wife innocently at cards, very merry. And I to bed,
leaving them to their sport and blindman’s buff.
27-28. My people came to bed after their sporting, at 4 a-clock in
the morning. I up at 7, and to Deptford and Woolwich ina galley,
the Duke calling to me out of the barge, in which the King was with
him going down the River, to know whither Iwas going; Itold him
to Woolwich. But was troubled afterward I should say no farther,
being in a galley, lest he think me too profuse in my journys. Did
several businesses; and then back again by 2 a-clock to SirJ. Mennes
to dinner by appointment, where all yesterday’s company but Mr.
Coventry, who could not come. Here merry; and after an hour’s
chat, Idown to the office, where busy late, and then home to supper
and to bed. The Comett appeared again tonight, but duskishly. I
went to bed, leaving my wife and all her folks, and Will also, to
455
come to make Christmas gamballs tonight. I waked in the morning
about 6 a-clock, and my wife not come to bed. I lacked a pot but
there was none, and bitter cold, so was forced to rise and piss in the
chimny, and to bed again. Slepta little longer, and then hear my
people coming up and so I rose; and my wife to bed at 8 a-clock in
the morning, which vexed mealittle, but I believe there was no
hurt in it all, but only mirth — therefore took no notice. I abroad
with Sir W. Batten to the Council Chamber, where all of us to
discourse about the way of measuring ships and the freight fit to
give for them by the Tun - where it was strange methought, to hear
so poor discourses among the Lords themselfs: and most of all, to
see howalittle empty matter, delivered gravely by Sir W. Penn,
was taken mighty well, though nothing in the earth to the purpose.
But clothes, I perceive more and more every day, is a great matter.
Thence home with Sir W. Batten by coach; and I home to dinner,
finding my wife still in bed. After dinner, abroad; and among other
things, visited my Lady Sandwich and was there with her and the
young ladies playing at Cards till night; then home and to my office
late; then home to bed — leaving my wife and people up to more
sports, but without any great satisfaction to myself therein.