1664-09-31

Up by 5 a-clock and to my office, where T. Hater and Will
met me; and so we despatch a great deal of my business as to the
ordering my papers and books, which were behindhand. All the
morning very busy at my office. Atnoon home to dinner and there
my wife hath got me some pretty good oysters, which is very soon,
and the soonest I think I ever eat any. After dinner I up to hear my
boy play upon a lute which I have this day borrowed of Mr. Hunt,
and endeed, the boy would with little practice play very well upon
the Lute — which pleases me well. So by coach to the Tanger
419
1664 31 August—3 September
Committee, and there have another small business, by which I may
get a little small matter of money. Stayed but little there; and so
home and to my office very late, casting up my month’s accounts;
and blessed be God, find myself worth 1020! — which is still the
most I ever was worth. So home and to bed.
—~%SEPTEMBER#-
2. Up very betimes and walked (my boy with me) to Mr. Coles,
and after long waiting below, he being under the barber’s hands, I
spoke with him and he did give me much hopes of getting my debt
that my brother owed me, and also that things would go well with
my father. Walked home, doing very many errands by the way, to
my great content. And at the Change met and spoke with several
persons about serving us with pieces-of-eight at Tanger. So home
to dinner above stairs, my wife not being well of those in bed — I
dined by her bedside. But I got her to rise, and abroad with me by
coach to Bartholomew Fayre, and our boy with us, and there
showed them and myself the dancing on the ropes and several other
the best shows. But pretty it is, to see how our boy carries himself,
so innocently clownish as would make one laugh. Here till late and
dark. Then up and down to buy combes for my wife to give her
maids; and then by coach home and there at the office set down my
day’s work; and then home to bed.
3. Ihave had a bad night’s rest tonight, not sleeping well, as my
wife observed, and once or twice she did wake me; and I thought
myself to be mightily bit with fleas, and in the morning she chid her
maids for not looking the fleas a-days. But whenI rise, I find that it
is only the change of the weather from hot to cold, which (as I was
two winters ago) doth stop my pores, and so my blood tingles and
iches all day all over my body and so continued to do, all the day
long just as I was then; and ifit continues to be so cold, I fear I must
come to the same pass. But sweating cured me then, and I hope and
am told will this also. At the office; sat all the morning. Dined at
home; and after dinner to Whitehall to the Fishing Committee, but
not above four of us met, which could do nothing; anda sad thing it
is to see so great a work so ill fallowed — for at this pace it can come
to nothing but disgrace to us all. Broke up and did nothing. So I
420
walked to Westminster, and there at my barber’s had good luck to
find Jane alone; and there I talked with her and got the poor wretch
to promise to meet me in the abbey on tomorrow come sennit,
telling me that her maister and mistress have a mind to get her a
husband, and so will not let her go abroad without them — but only
in sermon time a-Sundays she doth go out. I would I could get a
good husband for her, for she is one I alway thought a good-
natured as well as a well-looked girl.