1664-10-05

Up betimes and to my office. And thence by coach to New
Bridewell to meet with Mr. Poyntz to discourse with him (being
master of the workhouse there) about making of Bewpers for us —
but he was not within. However, his clerk did lead me up and down
through all the houses. And there I did with great pleasure see the
many pretty works and the little children imployed, everyone to do
something; which was a very fine sight and worthy incouragement.
I cast away a Crowne among them, and so to the Change — and
among the Linnen wholesale Drapers to enquire about Callicos, to
see what can be done with them for the supplying our want of
Bewpers for flags. And I think I shall do something therein to good
purpose for the King. So to the Coffee-house and there fell in
discourse with the Secretary of the Virtuosi of Gresham College,
and had very fine discourse with him. He tells me of a new-invented
Instrument to be tried before the College anon, andI intend to see
it. So to Trinity house, and there Idined among the old dull fellows.
430
And so home — and to my office a while; and then comes Mr.
Cocker to see me and I discoursed with him about his writing and
ability of sight, and howI shall do to get some glass or other to help
my eyes by Candlelight; and he tells me he will bring me the helps
he hath within a day or two, and show me what he doth. Thence to
the Musique-meeting at the post office, where I was once before.
And thither anon come all the Gresham College and a great deal of
noble company. And the new instrument was brought, called the
Arched Viall — where, being tuned with Lutestrings and played on
with Kees like an Organ — a piece of Parchment is always kept
moving; and the strings, which by the keys are pressed down upon
it, are grated, in imitation of a bow, by the parchment; and so it is
intended to resemble several vyalls played on with one bow — but so
basely and harshly, that it will never do. But after three hours’ stay,
it could not be Fixt in tune; and so they were fain to go to some
other Musique of instruments, which Iam grown quite out of love
with; and so I, after some good discourse with Mr. Spong, Hill,
Grant, Dr. Whisler,and others by turns, I home to my office and
there late; and so home -— where Iunderstand my wife hath spoke to”
Jane and ended matters of difference between her and her, and she
stays with us; which I am glad of, for her fault is nothing but
sleepiness and forgetfulness; otherwise, a good-natured, quiet,
well-meaning, honest servant, and one that will do as she is bid, so
one called upon her and will see her do it. This morning by 3 a-
clock, the Prince and King, and Duke with him, went down the
River; and the Prince under sail the next tide after, and so is gone
from the Hope. God give him better success then he used to have.