1664-08-04

Up betimes and to the office, fitting myself against a great
dispute about the East India Company, which spent afterward with
us all the morning. At noon dined with Sir W. Pen, a piece of beef
only, and Icounterfeited a friendship and mirth which I cannot have
with him. Yet out with him by his coach, and he did carry me to a
play and pay for meat the King’s house, whichis The Rivall Ladys, a
very innocent and most pretty witty play —I was much pleased with
it; and it being given me, Ilook upon it as no breach to my oath. Here
we hear that Clun, one oftheir best actors, was the last night, going
out oftowne (after he had acted The Alchymist, wherein was one ofhis
best parts that he acts) to his country house, was set upon and
murdered; one of the rogues taken, an Irish fellow. It seems, most
cruelly butchered and bound-the house willhavea great miss ofhim.
s—6. Up very betimes and set my plasterer to work about whiting
and colouring my Musique roome; which having with great
pleasure seen done, about 10 a-clock I dressed myself, and so
mounted upon a very pretty Mare, sent me by Sir W. Warren
according to his promise yesterday — and so through the City, nota
little proud, God knows, to be seen upon so pretty a beast; and to
my Cosen W. Joyces, who presently mounted too, and he and I out
of town toward Highgate, in the way, at Kentish towne, showing
me the place and manner of Cluns being killed and laid in a ditch;
and yet was not killed by any wounds, having only one in his arm,
but bled to death through his strugling. He told me also the manner
of it — of his going home so late, drinking with his whore — and
manner of having it found out. Thence forward to Barnett and
there drank, and so by night to Stevenige, it raininga
little but not
much; and there to my great trouble find that my wife was not
412
come, nor any Stamford coach gone down this week, so that she
cannot come. So, vexed and weary and not thoroughly out of pain
neither in my old parts — I after supper to bed. And aftera little
sleep, W. Joyce comes in his shirt to my chamber, with a note anda
messenger from my wife that she was come by Yorke coach to
Bigglesworth, and would be with us tomorrow morning. So, I
mightily pleased at her discreet action in this business, I with peace
to sleep again till next morning. So up; and W. Joyce and Ito a game
at Bowles on the green there — till 8 a-clock; and then comes my
wife in the coach, anda coach full of women. So, very joyful, drank
there, not lighting; and we mounted and away with them to
Welling, and there light and dined very well, and merry and glad to
see my poor wife.