1664-06-14

Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning and had
great conflict about the flags again. So home to dinner; and after
dinner by coach to Kensington, in the way overtaking Mr. Laxton
the Apothecary with his wife and daughters, very fine young lasses,
in a coach. And so both of us to my Lady Sandwich, who had lain
this fortnight here at Deane Hodges. Much company came hither
today, my Lady Carteret &c., Sir Wm. Wheeler and his Lady, and
above all Mr. Becke of Chelsy and wife and daughter, my Lord’s
Mistress — one that hath not one good feature in her face and yet is a
fine lady, of a fine Talle and very well carriaged and mighty
discreet. I took all the occasion I could to discourse with the young
ladies in her company, to give occasion to her to talk; which now
and then she did and that mighty finely, and is I perceive a woman
of such an ayre, as Iwonder the less at my Lord’s favour to her, and I
dare warrant him she hath brains enough to entangle him. Two or
three hours we were in her company, going into Sir H. Finch’s
garden and seeing the fountayne and singing there with the ladies;
and a mighty fine cool place it is, with a great laver of water in the
middle, and the bravest place for music I ever heard. After much
mirth, discoursing to the ladies in defence of the city against the
country or court, and giving them occasion to invite themselfs
tomorrow to me to dinner to my venison pasty, Igot their mother’s
leave and so good-night — very well pleased with my day’s work;
and above all, that I have seen my Lord’s Mistress. So home to
supper. A little at my office and to bed.
1. At Greenwich Palace.
395
15-16. Up and by appointment with Capt. Witham (the Captain
that brought the news of the disaster at Tanger where my Lord
Tiviott was slain) and Mr. Tooker to Beares Quay and there saw,
and more afterward at the several Granarys, several parcels of
Oates. And strange it is to hear how it will heat itselfiflaid up green
and not often turned. We came not to any agreement, but did
cheapen several parcels; and thence away, promising to send again
to them. And anon at noon comes Mr. Creed by chance, and by and
by the three young ladies, and very merry we were with our pasty,
very well baked — and a good dish of roasted chickens — pease —
lobsters — strawberries. And after dinner to cards; and about 5 a-
clock by water down to Greenwich and up to the top of the hill and
there played upon the ground at Cards; and so to the Cherry garden
and then by water, singing finely, to the Bridge and there landed;
and so took boat again and to Somersett house. And by this time,
the tide being against us, it was past 10 of the clock; and such a
troublesome passage in regard of my Lady Paulina’s fearfulness,
that in all my life I never did see any poor wretch in that condition.
Being come hither, there waited for them their coach; but it being
so late, I doubted what to do how to get them home. After half an
hour’s stay in the street, I sent my wife home by coach with Mr.
Creed’s boy — and myself and Creed in the coach home with them;
but Lord, the fear that my Lady Paulina was in every step of the
way; and endeed, at this time of the night it was no safe thing to go
that road," so that I was even afeared myself, though I appeared
otherwise. We came safe, however, to their house, where all were
abed. We knocked them up, my Lady and all the family being in
bed. So put them into doors; and leaving them with the maids, bade
them goodnight and then into the town, he andI, it being about 12
a-clock and past; and to several houses, Inns, but could get no
lodging, all being in bed; at the last house, at last we found some
people drinking and roaring, and there got in; and after drinking,
got an ill bed, where I lay in my drawers and stockings and
waistcoat.