1664-10-13

After being at the office all the morning, I home and dined;
and taking leave of my wife, with my mind nota little troubled how
she would look after herself or house in my absence, especially too,
leaving a considerable sum of money in the office, I by coach to the
Red Lyon in Aldersgate Streete and there by agreement met W.
Joyce and Tom Trice, and mounted —I upon a very fine mare that
Sir W. Warren helps me to. And so very merrily rode till it was very
dark, I leading the way through the dark to Welling; and there, not
being very weary, to supper and to bed — but very bad accomoda-
tion at the Swan. In this day’s Journy I met with Mr. White,
Cromwells Chaplin that was, and hada great deal of discourse with
him. Among others, he tells me that Richard [Cromwell] is and
hath long been in France, and is now going into Italy — he owns
publicly that he doth correspond and return him all his money.
That Richard hath been in some straits at the beginning, but
relieved by his friends. That he goes by another name, but doth not
disguise himself nor deny himself to any man that challenges him.
1. See above, p. 159 (10 October) & n.
432
He tells me for certain, that offers had been made to the old man! of
marriage between the King and his daughter, to have obliged him;
but he would not. He thinks (with me) that it never was in his
power to bring in the King with the consent of any of his officers
about him. And that he scorned to bring him in as Monke did, to
secure himself and deliver everybody else. When I told him of what
I found writ in a French book of one Monsieur Sorbiere, that gives
an account of his observations here in England — among other
things, he says that it is reported that Cromwell did in his life-time
transpose many of the bodies of the kings of England from one
grave to another, and that by that means it is not known certainly
whether the head that is now set up upon apost be that of Cromwell
or of one of the kings — Mr. White tells me that he believes he never
had so poor a low thought in him to trouble himself about. He says
the hand of God is much to be seen; that all his children are in good
condition enough as to estate, and that their relations that betrayed
their family are all now either hanged or very miserable.