1664-04-25

Up; and with Sir W. Pen by coach to St. James’s; and there up
to the Duke, and after he was ready, to his closet — where most of
our talk about a Dutch war, and discoursing of things endeed now
for it. The Duke (which gives me great good hope) doth talk of
setting up a good discipline in the fleet. In the Duke’s chamber there
is a bird, given him by Mr. Pierce the surgeon, comes from the East
Indys — black the greatest part, with the finest coller of white about
the neck.’ But talks many things, and neyes like the horse and other
things, the best almost that ever I heard bird in my life. Thence I
1. Probably a mina from Bengal.
380
walked to my Lord Sandwiches, where by agreement I met my
wife and there dined with the young ladies; my Lady being not
well, kept her chamber. Much simple discourse at table among the
young ladies. After dinner walked in the garden, talking with Mr.
Moore about my Lord’s business. He told me my Lord runs in debt
every day more and more, and takes little care how to come out of
it. He counted to me how my Lord pays use now for above 9oo0o0l —
which is a sad thing, especially considering the probability of his
going to sea in great danger of his life — and his children, many of
them, to provide for. Thence, the young ladies going out to visit, I
took my wife by coach out through the City, discoursing how to
spend the afternoon — and conquered, with much ado, a desire of
going to a play. But took her out at Whitechapel and to Bednell
green; so to Hackny, where I have not been manyayear, since a
little child I boarded there. Thence to Kingsland by my nurse’s
house, Goody Lawrence, where my brother Tom and I was kept
when young. Then to Newington green and saw the outside of
Mrs. Herberts house where she lived, and my aunt Ellen with her.
But Lord, how in every point I find myself to over-value things
when a child. Thence to Islington, and so to St. John’s to the Red
bull and there saw the latter part of a rude Prize fight — but with
good pleasure enough. And thence back to Islington and at the
Kings head, where Pitts lived, we light and eat and drunk for
remembrance of the old house sake. And so through Kingsland
again and so to Bishopsgate, and so home with great pleasure — the
country mighty pleasant; and we with great content home, and
after supper to bed.