1664-05-06

This morning up and to my office, where Sympson my Joyner
came to work upon altering my closet, whichI alter by setting the
door in another place, and several other things to my great content.
Busy at it all day; only, in the afternoon home and there, my books
at the office being out of order, wrote letters and other businesses.
So at night, with my head fullof the business of my closet, home to
bed. And strange it is to think how building doth fill my mind and
383
put out all other things out of my thoughts.
t1. Up;andall day, both forenoon and afternoon, at my office, to
see it finished by the Joyner and washed and everything in order;
and endeed, now my closet is very convenient and pleasant for me.
My uncle Wight came to me to my office this afternoon and from
me went to my house to see my wife; and strange to think that my
wife should by and by send for me after he was gone, to tell me that
he should begin discourse of her want of children and his also, and
how he thought it would be best for him and her to have one
between them, and he would give her sol either in money or jewell
beforehand and make the child his heyre. He commended her body
and discoursed that for all he knew the thing was lawful. She says
she did give him a very warm answer, such as he did not excuse
himself by saying that he said this in jest but told her that since he
saw what her mind was, he would say no more to her of it, and
desired her to make no words of it. It seemed he did say all this in a
kind of counterfeit laugh; but by all words that passed, which I
cannot now so well set down, it is plain to me that he was in good
earnest, and that I fear all his kindness is but only his lust to her.
What to think of it ofasudden I know not, but I think not to take
notice yet of it to him till I have thought better of it. So, with my
mind and head a little troubled, I received a letter from Mr.
Coventry about a mast for the Dukes Yacht; which, with other
business, makes me resolve to go betimes to Woolwich tomorrow.
So to supper and to bed.