1664-06-20

It having been a very cold night last night, I had got some
cold, and so in pain by wind; anda sure precursor of pain, I find, is
sudden letting off some farts; and when that stops, then my
passages stop and my pain begins. Up, and did several businesses;
and so with my wife by water to Whitehall — she to her father’s, I to
the Duke, where we did our usual business. And among other
discourse of the Dutch, he was merrily saying how they print that
Prince Robt., Duke of Albemarle, and my Lord Sandwich are to be
Generalls; and soon after is to fallow them “‘Vieux Pen’’, and so the
Duke called him in mirth Old Pen. They have, it seems, lately
wrote to the King to assure him that their setting-out ships were
only to defend their fishing trade and to stay near home, not to
annoy the King’s subjects; and to desire that he would do the like
with his ships — which the King laughs at, but yet is troubled they
should think him such a child, to suffer them to bring home their
fish and east India Company’s ships, and then they will not care a
fart for us. Thence to Westminster hall, it being term-time. And
meeting Pickering, he tells me how my Lady last week went to see
Mrs. Becke the mother. And by and by the daughter came in. But
that my Lady doth say herself (as he says) that, she knew not for
what reason, for she never knew they had a daughter (which I do
not believe), she was troubled and her heart did rise as soon as she
appeared, and seems the most ugly woman that ever she saw. This,
if true, were strange; but I believe it is not. Thence to my Lord’s
lodgings and were merry with the young ladies; who make a great
story of their appearing before their mother the morning after we
carried them, the last week, home so late. And that their mother
took it very well, at least without any anger. Here I heard how the
rich widow, my Lady Gold, is married to one Neale, after he had
received a box on the eare by her brother (who was therea sentinel
1. To marry her off.
397
in behalf of some Courtier) at the door; but made him draw, and
wounded him. She called Neale up to her and sent for a priest,
married presently, and went to bed. The brother sent to the Court
and had a Serjeant sent for Neale; but Neale sent for him up to be
seen in bed, and she owned him for her husband. And so all is past.
It seems Sir H. Bennett did look after her.