1664-07-26

All the morning at the office. At noon to Anth. Joyces to our
gossips dinner;' I had sent a dozen anda half bottles of wine thither
and paid my double share besides, which is 18s. Very merry we
were, and when the women were merry and ris from table, I above
with them, ne’er a man but J; I begin discourse of my not getting of
children and prayed them to give me their opinions and advice; and
they freely and merrily did give me these ten among them. 1. Do
not hug my wife too hard nor too much. 2. Eat no late suppers. 3.
Drink Juyce of sage. 4. Tent and toast. 5. Wear cool Holland-
drawers. 6. Keep stomach warm and back cool. 7. Upon my query
whether it was best to do at night or morn, they answered me
neither one nor other, but when we have most mind to it. 8. Wife
not to go too strait-laced. 9. Myself to drink Mum and sugar. Io.
Mrs Ward did give me to change my plat. The 3rd, 4th, 6th, 7th,
and roth they all did seriously declare and lay much stress upon
them, as rules fit to be observed indeed, and especially the last: to lie
with our heads where our heels do, or at least to make the bed high
at feet and low at head. Very merry all, as much as Icould be in such
sorry company. Great discourse of the fray yesterday” in Moore-
fields, how the Butchers at first did beat the Weavers (between
whom there hath been ever an old competition for mastery), but at
last the weavers rallied and beat them. At first the butchers knock
down all for weavers that had green or blue aprons, till they were
fain to pull them off and put them in their breeches. At last, the
butchers were fain to pull off their sleeves, that they might not be
known, and were soundly beaten out of the field, and some deeply
wounded and bruised —till at last the weavers went out tryumph-
ing, calling, “A hundred pound for a Butcher!” Toward [evening] I
1. To celebrate the christening of his daughter: see above, p. 403 (10July).
2. St James’s Day, a holiday.
409
to Mr. Reeves to see a Microscope, he having been with me today
morning, and there chose one which I will have. Thence back and
took up young Mrs. Harman, a pretty-bred and pretty-humored
woman, whom |could love well, though not handsome, yet for her
person and carriage and black eye. By the way met her husband
going for her, and set them both down at home; and so home to my
office a while, and so to supper and bed.