1664-09-06

Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning. At noon
home to dinner. Then to my office and there waited, thinking to
have had Baggwell’s wife come to me about business, that I might
have talked with her; but she came not. So I to Whitehall by coach
with Mr. Andrews; and there I got his contract for the victualling of
Tanger signed and sealed by us there. So that all that business is well
over, and I hope to have made a good business of it — and to receive
100! by it the next week — for which God be praised. Thence to W.
Joyces and Anthonys to invite them to dinner to meet my aunt
James at my house. So home, having called upon Doll, our pretty
Change woman, for a pair of gloves trimmed with yellow ribbon
(to [the] petticoat she bought yesterday), which costs me 20s. But
she is so pretty, that, God forgive me, I could not think it too much;
which is a strange slavery that I stand in to beauty, that I value
nothing near it. So going home and my coach stopping in Newgate
market over against a poulterer’s shop, I took occasion to buy a
rabbit; but it proved a deadly old one when I came to eat it—as I did
do after an hour’s being at my office; and after supper, again there
till past 11 at night. And so home and to bed. This day, Mr.
Coventry did tell us how the Duke did receive the Dutch
Embassador the other day — by telling him that whereas they think
us in Jest, he believes that the Prince (Rupert), which goes in this
fleet to guinny, will soon tell them that we are in earnest; and that he
himself will do the like here in the head of fleet here at home. And
that for the Meschants,' which he told the Duke there were in
England which did hope to do themselfs good by the King’s being
at war, says he, “‘the English have ever united all this private
1. Miscreants, sc. Puritan fanatics.
422
>
differences to attend Forraigne,”’ and that Cromwell, notwith-
standing the Meschants in his time (which were the Cavaliers), he
did never find them interrupt him in his foreign businesses. And
that he did not doubt but to live to see the Dutch as fearful of
provoking the English under the government of a King, as he
remembers them to have been under that of a Coquin. I writ all this
story to my Lord Sandwich tonight into the Downes, it being very
good and true, word for word from Mr. Coventry today.