1664-01-31

Wehad to dinner, my wife and I, a fine Turkey and a mince-
pie, and dined in state, poor wretch, she and I; and have thus kept
our Christmas together, all alone almost — having not once been
out. But tomorrow my vowes are all out as to plays and wine; but I
hope I shall not be long before I come to new ones, so much good,
and God’s blessing, I find to have attended them. Thence to the
office and did several businesses and answered several people; but
my head akeing and it being my great night of accounts, I went
forth, took coach, and to my brother’s, but he was not within; and
so Iback again and sat an hour or two at the Coffee[-house], hearing
335
1663 31 December
some simple discourse about Quakers being charmed by
astring
about their wrists. And so home; and aftera
little while at my office,
Ihome and supped; and so had a good fire in my chamber and there
sat till 4 a-clock in the morning, making up my accounts and
writing this last Journall of the year.
And first, I bless God I do find that 1am worth in money, besides
all my household stuff or anything of Brampton, above 80ol — for
which the good God be pleased to give me a thankful heart and a
mind careful to preserve this and encrease it. I do live at my
lodgings in the Navy Office — my family being, besides my wife
and I, Jane Gentleman, Besse our excellent good-natured cook-
maid, and Susan,alittle girl — having neither man nor boy, nor like
to have again a good while — living now in most perfect content and
quiet and very frugally also. My health pretty good, but only that I
have been much troubled with a costivenesse which I am labouring
to get away, and have hopes of doing it. At the office I am well,
though envied to the devil by Sir W. Batten, who hates me to death
but cannot hurt me. The rest either love, or at least do not show
otherwise, though I know Sir W. Penn to bea false knave touching
me, though he seems fair. My father and mother well in the
country; and at this time, the young ladies of Hinchingbrooke with
them, their house having the smallpox in it. The Queene, after a
long and sore sickness, is become well again. And the King minds
his mistress a little too much. But Ihope all things will go well, and
in the Navy perticularly; wherein I shall do my duty, whatever
comes of it. The great talk is the designs of the King of France;
whether against the Pope or King of Spain nobody knows; but a
great and a most promising prince he is, and all the princes of
Europe have their eye upon him. My wife’s brother come to great
unhappiness by the ill-disposition, my wife says, of his wife, and
her poverty; which she now professes, after all her husband’s
pretence of
a great portion. But I see none of them; at least, they
come not to trouble me. My brother Tom Iknow not what to think
of, for I cannot hear whether he minds his business or no. And my
brother John, at Cambrige with as little hopes of doing good there;
for when he was here, he did give me great cause of dissatisfaction
with his manner oflife. Pall with my father, and God knows what
she doth there or what will become of her, for I have not anything
yet to spare her, and she grows now old and must be disposed of
one way or other. The Turkes very fur entered into Germany, and
336
31 December 1663
all that part of the world at a loss what to expect from his
proceedings.
Myself, blessed be God, in a good way and design and resolution
by sticking to my business to geta little money, with doing the best
service I can to the King also— which God continue. So ends the old
year.
337
Aes
ae
fp
—+ JANUARY
#-
1. Went to bed between 4 and 5 in the morning with my mind in
good temper of satisfaction — and slept till about 8, that many
people came to speak with me. And then, being to dine at my uncle
Wights, I went to the Coffee-house (sending my wife by Will) and
there stayed talking an hour with Coll. Middleton and others; and
among other things, about a very rich widow, young and
handsome, of one Sir Nich. Golds, a merchant lately fallen, and of
great Courtiers that already look after her. Her husband not dead a
week yet. She is reckoned worth 80000/. Thence to my Uncle
Wights, where Dr. [Burnet] among others dined, and his wife a
seeming proud conceited woman; I know not what to make of her.
But the Doctors discourse did please me very well about the disease
of the Stone; above all things extolling Turpentine, which he told
me how it may be taken in pills with great ease. There was brought
to table a hot pie made of swan I sent them yesterday, given me by
Mr. Howe; but we did not eat any of it. But my wife and Irise from
table pretending business, and went to the Dukes house, the first
play Ihave been at these six months, according to my last vowe; and
here saw the so much cried-up play of Henry the &8th— which, though
I went with resolution to like it, is so simple a thing, made up of a
great many patches, that, besides the shows and processions in it,
there is nothing in the world good or well done. Thence, mightily
dissatisfied, back at night to my uncle Wights and supped with
them; but against my stomach out of the offence the sight of my
aunts hands gives me; and ending supper with a mighty laugh (the
greatest I have had these many months) at my uncles being out in
his grace after meat, we rise and broke up and my wife and I home
and to bed — being sleepy since last night.
2. Ido find that I am not able to conquer myself as to going to
plays till I do come to some new vow concerning it and that Iam
now come: that is to say, that I will not see above one in a month at
338
any of the public theatres till the sum of 50s. be spent, and then none
before New Year’s Day next, unless that I do become worth roool
sooner then then — and then I am free to come to some other terms.
And so I took my wife to the King’s house and there met with Mr.
Nicholson my old colleague — and saw The Usurper, which is no
good play, though better then what I saw yesterday. However, we
ris unsatisfied and took coach and home. AndIto the office late,
writing letters; and so home to supper and to bed.