1664-06-31

Up, and called upon Mr. Hollyard, with whom I advised and
shall fall upon some course of doing something for my disease of
the wind, which grows upon me every day more and more. Thence
to my Lord Sandwiches; and while he was dressing, I below
discoursed with Capt. Cooke andI think, ifI do find it fit to keep a
boy at all, Ihad as good be supplied from him with one as anybody.
By and by up to my Lord — and to discourse about his going to sea
388
31 May-1 June 1664
and the message I had from Mr. Coventry to him. He wonders, as
he well may, that this course should be taken, and he every day with
the Duke (who nevertheless seems most friendly to him), who hath
not yet spoke one word to my Lord of his desire to have him go to
sea. My Lord doth tell me clearly that were it not that he, as all other
men that were of the parliaments side, are obnoxious to reproach,
and so is forced to bear what otherwise he would not, he would
never suffer everything to be done in the Navy. and he never be
consulted; and it seems, in the naming of all these commanders for
this fleet, he hath never been asked one Question. But we concluded
it wholly inconsistent with his Honour not to go [with] this fleet,
nor with the reputation which the world hath of his interest at
Court; and so he did give me commission to tell Mr. Coventry that
he is most willing to receive any commands from the Duke in this
fleet, were it less then it is, and that perticularly in this service. With
this message I parted; and by coach to the office, where I found Mr.
Coventry and told him this. Dined at home; and so to the office,
where a great while alone in my office, nobody near, with
Bagwell’s wife of Deptford; but the woman seems so modest that I
durst not offer any courtship to her, though I had it in my mind
when I brought her in to me. But am resolved to do her husband a
courtesy, for I think he is a man that deserves very well. I was told
today that upon Sunday night last, being the King’s birthday — the
King was at my Lady Castlemaine’s lodgings (over the hither-gate
at Lambert’s lodgings) dancing with fiddlers all night almost, and
all the world coming by taking notice of it —- which I am sorry to
hear.
The discourse of the town is only whether a war with Holland or
no. And we are preparing for it all we can, which is but little.
Myself subject more then ordinary to pain by winde, which makes
me very sad — together with the trouble which at present lies upon
me in my father’s behalf, rising from the death of my brother —
which are many and great. Would to God they were over.
—%JUNE#-
1. Up, having lain long, going to bed very late after the ending
my accounts. Being up, Mr. Hollyard came to me; and to my great
sorrow, after his great assuring me that I could not possibly have
389
the stone again, he tells me that he doth verily fear that I have it
again and hath brought me something to dissolve it — which doth
make me very much troubled and pray to God to ease me. He gone,
I down by water to Woolwich and Deptford to look after the
despatch of the ships, all the way reading Mr. Spencers book of
Prodigys, which is most ingeniously writ, both for matter and
style. Home at noon and my little girl got me my dinner; and I
presently out by water and landed at Somerset stairs and thence
through Coventgarden, where I met with Mr. Southwell (Sir W.
Pen’s friend), who tells me the very sad newes of my Lord Tiviott’s
and 19 more commission officers being killed at Tanger by the
Moores, by an ambush of the enemy’s upon them while they were
surveying their lines; which is very sad, and he says afflicts the King
much. Thence to W. Joyces, where by appointment I met my wife
(but neither of them at home); and she and I
to the King’s house and
saw The Silent Woman; but methought not so well done or so good
[a] play as I formerly thought it to be, or else Iam nowadays out of
humour. Before the play was done, it fell such a storm of Hayle that
we in the middle of the pit' were fain to rise, and all the house in a
disorder; and so my wife and I out and got intoa
little alehouse and
stayed there an hour after the play was done before we could get a
coach; which at last we did (and by chance took up Joyce Norton
and Mrs. Bowles and set them at home); and so home ourselfs and I
a little to my office and so home to supper and to bed.