1664-07-23

Walked toward Westminster; and being in an idle and wanton
humour, walked through Fleet alley, and there stood a most pretty
wench at one of the doors. So I took a turn or two; but what by
sense of honour and conscience, I would not go in. But much
against my will, took coach and away to Westminster hall, and
there light of Mrs. Lane and plotted with her to go over the water;
so met at Whites stairs in Channel row, and over to the old house at
Lambeth marsh and there eat and drank and had my pleasure of her
twice — she being the strangest woman in talk, of love to her
husband sometimes, and sometimes again she doth care not for him
— and yet willing enough to allow me a liberty of doing what I
would with her. So spending 5 or 6s. upon her, I could do what I
would; and after an hour’s stay and more, back again and set her
ashore there again, and I forward to Fleetstreete and called at Fleet
alley, not knowing how to command myself; and went in and there
saw what formerly I have been acquainted with, the wickedness of
those houses and the forcing a man to present expense. The
woman, endeed, is a most lovely woman; but I had no courage to
meddle with her, for fear of her not being wholesome, and so
counterfeited that Ihad not money enough. It was pretty to see how
cunning that Jade was; would not suffer me to have to do in any
manner with her after she saw I had no money; but told me then I
408
would not come again, but she now was sure I would come again —
though I hope in GodI shall not, for though she be one of the
prettiest women I ever saw, yet I fear her abusing me. So desiring
God to forgive me for this vanity, I went home, taking some books
home from my bookseller and taking his lad home with me, to
whom I paid rol for books I have jaid up money for and laid out
within these three weeks — and shall do no more a great while I
hope. So to my office, writing letters; and then home and to bed,
weary of the pleasure I have had today and ashamed to think of it.