1664-06-13

So up at § a-clock, and with Capt. Taylor on board her at
Deptford and found all out of order, only the soldiers civil and Sir
Arth. Bassett a civil person. Irated at Capt. Taylor, whom contrary
to my expectation I found a lying and a very stupid blundering
fellow, good for nothing; and yet we talk of him in the Navy as ifhe
had beena excellent officer, but I find him a lying knave—and of no
judgment or despatch at all. After finding the condition of the ship,
no master, not above four men, and many ships provisions, sails
and other things wanting, I went back and called upon Fudge;
whom I found, like a lying rogue, unready to go on board; but I did
so hare him that I made him get everything ready and left Taylor
and H. Russell to quicken him; and so away and I by water on to
Whitehall, where I met his Royal Highness at a Tanger Committee
about this very thing and did there satisfy him how things are; at
which all was pacified without any trouble — and I hope may end
well yet; but I confess I am at a vile trouble for fear the rogue should
not do his work and I come to shame and loss of the money I did
hope justly to have got by it. Thence walked with Mr. Coventry to
St. James’s. After dinner, we did talk of a History of the Navy of
England, how fit it were to be writ; and he did say that it hath been
in his mind to propose to me the writing of the history of the late
Dutch warr' — which I am glad to hear, it being a thing I much
1. Of 1652-4.
394
desire and sorts mightily with my genius — and if done well, may
recommend me much. So he says he will get me an order for
making of searches to all records &c. in order thereto, and I shall
take great delight in doing of it. Thence by water down to the
Tower, and thither sent for Mr. Creed to my house, where he
promised to be; and he and I down to the ship and find all things
in pretty good order. And I hope will end to my mind. Thence,
having a gally, down to Greenwich and there saw the King’s
works,'! which are great a-doing there. And so to the Cherry
garden and so carried some cherries home; and after supper to
bed — my wife lying with me; which from my not being
thoroughly well, nor she, we have not done above once these
two or three weeks.