1664-02-26

Up; and after dressing myself handsomely for riding, I out
and by water to Westminster to Mr. Creeds chamber; and after
drinking some Chocolatte and playing on the vyall, Mr. Mallard
being there, upon Creeds new vyall, which proves methinks much
worse then mine, and looking upon his new contrivance of a desk
and shelves for books, we set out from an Inne hard by, whither
Mr. Coventrys horse was carried — and around about the bush
through bad ways to Highgate; good discourse in the way had
between us and it being all day a most admirable pleasant day. We,
356
upon consultation, had stopped at the Cocke, a mile a-this-side
Barnett, being unwilling to put ourselfs to the charge or doubtful
acceptance of any provision against my Lord’s coming by, and
there got something and dined, setting a boy to look towards
Barnett hill against their coming. And after two or three false
alarms they came, and we met the coach very gracefully, andI hada
kind receipt from both Lord and Lady as I could wish and some
kind discourse; and then rode by the coach a good way and so fell to
discoursing with several of the people there, being a dozen
attending the coach and another coach for the maids and parson.
Among others, talking with W. Howe, he told me how my Lord in
his hearing the other day did largely tell my Lord Peterburgh and
Povy (who went with them down to Hinchingbrooke) how and
when he discarded Creed and took me to him; and that since, the
Duke of Yorke hath several times thanked him for me — which did
not a little please me. And anon, I desiring Mr. Howe to tell me
upon [what] occasion this discourse happened, he desired me to say
nothing of it now, for he would not have my Lord to take notice of
our being together, but he would tell me another time — which put
me into some trouble to think what he meant by it; but when we
came to my Lord’s house, I went in; and whether it was my Lord’s
neglect or general indifference Iknow not, but he made me no kind
of compliment there and methinks the young ladies look somewhat
highly upon me. So I went away without bidding adieu to
anybody, being desirous not to be thought too servile; but Ido hope
and believe that my Lord doth yet value me as high as ever, though
he dares not admit me to the freedom he once did — and that my
Lady is still the same woman. So rode home and there found my
uncle Wight. Tis an odd thing, as my wife tells me, his caressing*
her and coming on purpose to give her visitts; but I do not trouble
myself for him at all, but hope the best and very good effects of it.
He being gone, I eat something and my wife —I told all this day’s
passages, and she to give me very good and rationall advice how to
behave myself to my Lord and his family, by slighting everybody
but my Lord and Lady and not to seem to have the least society or
fellowship with them; which I am resolved to do, knowing that it is
my high carriage that must do me good there, and to appear in good
clothes and garbe. To the office a little; and being weary, early
home and to bed.