1664-03-14

Up, and walked to my brother’s, where I find he hath
continued talking idle all night and now knows me not — which
troubles me mightily. So I walked down and discoursed a great
while alone with the mayde, who tells me many passages of her
master’s practices and how she concludes that he hath run
behindhand a great while and owes money and hath been dunned
by several people; among others, by one Cave, both husband and
wife, but whether it was for money or something worse she knows
not. But there is one Cranburne, I think she called him, in Fleete
lane with whom he hath many times been mighty private, but what
their dealings have been she knows not, but believes they were
naught.* And then his sitting up two Saturday nights, one after
another, when all were a-bed, doing something to himself; which
she now suspects what it was but did not before. But tells me that he
hath been a very bad husband as to spending his time, and hath
often told him of it. So that upon the whole, I do find he is, whether
he lives or dies, a ruined man. And what trouble will befall me by it,
I know not. The Doctors give him over and so do all that see him.
He talks no sense two words together now. AndI confess it made
me weep to see that he should not be able when I asked him, to say
who I was. [My uncle Fenner] tells me his thoughts long of my
brother’s bad husbandry; and from that, to say that he believes he
owes a great deal of money — as, to my Cozen Scott, I know not
how much~and Dr. Tho. Pepys, 30/; but that the Doctor confesses
that he is paid 201 of it. And what with that and what he owes my
father and me, I doubt he is in a very sad condition; that if he lives,
he will not be able to show his head — which will be a very great
shame to me.
15-16. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning; and at
noon comes Madam Turner and her daughter The[oph]. — her chief
errand to tell me that she had got Dr. Wiverly her Doctor to search
my brother’s mouth, where Mr. Powell says there is an Ulcer; from
whence he concludes that he hath had the pox. But the Doctor
swears there is not, nor ever was any. And my brother being very
sensible, which Iwas glad to hear, he did talk with him about it; and
he did wholly disclaim that ever he had that disease or that ever he
said to Powell that he had it — all which did put me into great
364
comfort as to that reproach which was spread against him. So! sent
for a barrel of oysters and they dined, and we were very merry, I
being willing to be so upon this news. After dinner we took coach
and to my brother’s; where, contrary to my expectation, he
continues as bad or worse, talking idle and now not at all knowing
any of us as before. Here we stayed a great while, I going up and
down the house looking after things. In the evening Dr. Wiverley
came again andI sent for Mr. Powell (the Doctor and I having first
by ourselfs searched my brother again at his privities,; where he was
as clear as ever he was born, and in the Doctor’s opinion had been
ever so). And we three alone discoursed that business, where the
Coxcomb did give us his simple reasons for what he had said; which
the Doctor fully confuted and left the fellow, only saying that he
should cease to report any such thing and that what he had said was
the best of his judgment, from my brother’s words and ulcer, as he
supposed, in his mouth. I threatened him that I would have
satisfaction if I heard any more such discourse. And so good night
to them two, giving the Doctor a piece for his fee but the other
nothing.
I to my brother again, where Madam Turner and her company,
and Mrs. Croxton, my wife, and Mrs. Holding. About 8 a-clock
my brother begun to fetch his spittle with more pain and to speak as
much, but not so distinctly; till at last, the phlegm getting the
maistery of him and he beginning as we thought to rattle, I had no
mind to see him die, as we thought he presently would, and so
withdrew and led Mrs. Turner home. But before I came back,
which was in a quarter of an hour, my brother was dead. I went up
and found the nurse holding his eyes shut; and he, poor wretch,
lying with his chops fallen, a most sad sight and that which put me
into a present very great transport of grief and cries. And endeed, it
was a most sad sight to see the poor wretch lie now still and dead
and pale like a stone. I stayed till he was almost cold, while Mrs.
Croxton, Holden, and the rest did strip and lay him out — they
observing his corps, as they told me afterwards, to be as clear as any
they ever saw. And so this was the end of my poor brother,
continuing talking idle and his lips working even to his last, that his
phlegm hindered his breathing; and at last his breath broke out,
bringing a flood of phlegm and stuff out with it, and so he died.
This evening he talked among other talk a great deal of French, very
plain and good; as among others — “‘quand un homme boit quand il n’a
poynt d’inclinaciona boire il ne Iuyfaitjamais de bien.” 1 once begun to
365
tell him something of his condition and asked him whither he
thought he should go. He in distracted manner answered me —
“Why, whither should I go? there are but two ways. If I go to the
bad way, I must give God thanks for it. And if] go the other way, I
must give God the more thanks for it; and Ihope I have not been so
undutiful and unthankful in my life but I hope I shall go that way.”
This was all the sense, good or bad, I could get of him this day.
I left my wife to see him laid out, and I by coach home, carrying
my brother’s papers, all I could find, with me. And having wrote a
letter to my father, telling him what hath been said, I returned by
coach, it being very late and dark, to my brother’s. But all being
gone, the Corps laid out and my wife at Mrs. Turners, Ithither; and
there, after an hour’s talk, we up to bed — my wife andIin the little
blue chamber. And Ilay close to my wife, being full of disorder and
grief for my brother, that I could not sleep nor wake with
satisfaction; at last I slept till 5 or 6 a-clock. And then I rose and up,
leaving my wife in bed, and to my brother’s, where I set them on
cleaning the house. And my wife coming anon to look after things,
I up and down to my Cosen Stradwickes and uncle Fenners about
discoursing for the funeral, which Iam resolved to put off till Friday
next. Thence home and trimmed myself; and then to the Change
and told my uncle Wight of my brother’s death; and so by coach to
my Cosen Turners and there dined very well. But my wife having
those upon her today and in great pain, we were forced to rise in
some disorder and in Mrs. Turners coach carried her home and put
her to bed. Then back again with my Cosen Norton to Mrs.
Turners and there stayed a while talking with Dr. Pepys, that
puppy, whom I had no patience to hear. So I left them, and to my
brother’s to look after things — and saw the Coffin brought; and by
and by Mrs. Holden came and saw him nailed up. Then came W.
Joyce to me half-drunk, and much ado I had to tell him the story of
my brother’s being found clear of what was said, but he would
interrupt me by some idle discourse or other, of his crying what a
good man and a good speaker my brother was and God knows
what. At last, weary of him, I got him away andI to Mrs. Turner’s;
and there, though my heart is still heavy to think of my poor
brother, yet I could give way to my fancy to hear Mrs. The[oph].
play upon the Harpsicon — though the Musique did not please me
neither. Thence to my brother’s and found them with my maid
Elizabeth, taking an Inventory of the goods of the house; which |
was well pleased at, and am much beholding to Mr. Honywoods
366
man in doing of it. His name is Herbert, one that says he knew me
when he lived with Sir Samuel Morland — but Ihave forgot him. So
I left them at it and by coach home and to my office, there to do a
little business; but God knows, my heart and head is so full of my
brother’s death and the consequences of it, that I can do very little or
understand it. So home to supper; and after looking over some
business in my chamber, to bed to my wife, who continues in bed in
some pain still. This day I have a great barrel of Oysters given me
by Mr. Barrow, as big as 16 of others, and Itook it in the coach with
me to Mrs. Turner’s and gave them her. This day the Parliament
met again after a long prorogation — but what they have done Ihave
not been in the way to hear.