1664-10-26

Up-my people rising mighty betimes to fit themselfs to go
by water; and my boy, he could not sleep, but wakes about 4 a-
clock and in bed lay playing on his lute till daylight, and it seems did
the like last night till 12 a-clock. About 8 a-clock, my wife, she and
her woman and Besse and Jane and W. Hewers and the boy, to the
waterside and there took boat. And by and by, Iout of doors to look
after the Flagon, to get it ready to carry to Woolwich. That being
not ready,
I stepped aside and found out Nellson, he that Whistler
buys his Bewpers of, and did there buy five pieces at their price.
And am in hopes thereby to bring them down, or buy ourselfs all
we spend of Nellson at the first hand. This jobb was greatly to my
content. And by and by, the Flaggon being finished at the
Burnishers, I home; and there fitted myself and took a hackney
coach I hired (it being a very cold and fowle day) to Woolwich, all
the way reading in a good book touching the Fishery; and that being
done, in the book upon the statutes of Charitable uses, mightily to
my satisfaction. At Woolwich, Ithere up to the King and Duke and
they liked the plate well. Here I stayed above with them while the
ship was lanched; which was done with great success, and the King
did very much like the ship, saying-she had the best bow that ever he
saw. But Lord, the sorry talk and discourse among the great
courtiers round about him, without any reverence in the world, but
with so much disorder. By and by the Queen comes and her maids
of honour; one whereof, Mrs. Boynton, and the Duchesse of
Buckeingham, had been very sick coming by water in the barge
(the water being very rough); but what silly sport they made with
them, in very common terms methought, was very poor, and
below what people think these great people say and do. The
launching being done, the King and company went down to take
barge; and I sent for Mr. Pett and put the Flaggon into the Dukes
hand, and he, in the presence of the King, did give it, Mr. Pett
taking it upon his knee. This, Mr. Pett is wholly beholding to me
for, and he doth know and I believe will acknowledge it.