1664-03-12

Lay long, pleasantly entertaining myself with my wife; and
then up and to the office — where busy till noon, vexed to see how
Sir
J.Mennes deserves rather to be pitied for his dotage and folly
then imployed at a great salary to ruin the King’s business. At noon
to the Change and thence home to dinner; and then down to
Deptford, where busy a while; and then walking home, it fell hard
a-raining. So at Halfway house put in; and there meeting Mr. Stacy
with some company of pretty women -—I took him aside to a room
by ourselfs and there talked with him about the several sorts of
Tarrs; and so by and by parted and I walked home, and there late at
the office; and so home to supper and to bed.
1. ? Ann Gibbs.
362
13 March 1664
13. Lords day. 1lay long in bed, talking with my wife; and then up,
in great doubt whether I should not go see Mr. Coventry or no,
who hath not been well these two or three days; but it being foul
weather, I stayed within; and so to my office and there all the
morning reading some Common law, to which I will allota little
time now and then, for I much want it. At noon home to dinner;
and then after some discourse with my wife, to the office again; and
by and by Sir W. Pen came to me after sermon and walked with me
in the garden, and then one comes to tell me that Anth. and Will
Joyce were come to see me; so I in to them and made mighty much
of them, and very pleasant we were. And most of their business I
find to be to advise about getting some woman to attend my
Brother Tom, whom they say is very ill and seems much to want
one — to which I agreed, and desired them to get their wifes to
enquire out one. By and by they bid me good-night; but
immediately as they were gone out of doors comes Mrs. Turner’s
boy with a note to me, to tell me that my brother Tom was so ill as
they feared he could not long live and that it would be fit I should
come and see him. SoI sent for them back, and they came; and Will
Joyce desiring to speak with me alone, I took him up and there he
did plainly tell me, to my great astonishment, that my brother is
deadly ill and that their chief business of coming was to tell me so;
and which is worse, that his disease is the pox, which he hath
heretofore got and hath not been cured, but is come to this; and that
this is certain, though a secret told his father Fenner by the Doctor
which he helped my brother to. This troubled me mightily; but
however, I thought fit to go see him for speech of people’s sake, and
so walked along with them, and in our way called on my Uncle
Fenner (where I have not been this 12 months and more) and
advised with him; and then to my brother, who lies in bed talking
idle. He could only say that he knew me and then fell to other
discourse, and his face like a dying man — which Mrs. Turner, who
was here, and others conclude he is. The company being gone, I
took the mayde, which seems a very grave and serious woman, and
in W. Joyces company did enquire how things are with her master.
She told me many things very discreetly and said she had all his
papers and books and key of his cutting-house. And showed me a
bag which I and Wm: Joyce told, coming to s/ 14s. — which we left
with her again. After giving her good counsel, and the boys, and
seeing a nurse there of Mrs. Holden’s choosing, I left them and so
walked home, greatly troubled to think of my brother’s condition
363
and the trouble that would arise to me by his death or continuing
sick. So at home, my mind troubled, to bed.