1664-11-22

At the office all the morning. Sir G. Carteret, upon a motion
of Sir W. Batten’s, did promise, ifwe would writea
letter to him, to
show it to the King on our behalf, touching our desire of being
Commissioners of the Prize office. I wrote a letter to my mind; and
after eating a bit at home (Mr. Sheply dining and taking his leave of
me), abroad and to Sir G. Carteret with the letter; and thence to my
Lord Treasurer’s, where with Sir Ph. Warwicke long studying all
we could to make the last year swell as high as we could. And it is
much to see how he doth study for the King to do it, to get all the
money from the Parliament, all he can—andI shall be serviceable to
him therein, to help him to heads upon which to enlarge the report
of the expense. He did observe to me how obedient this Parliament
was for a while; and the last sitting, how they begun to differ and to
carp at the King’s officers; and what they will do now, he says, is to
make agreement for the money, for there is no guess to be made of
it. He told me he was prepared to convince the parliament that the
Subsidys are a most ridiculous tax (the four last not rising to
400001)' and unequall. He talks of a tax of assessement of 700001
for five years, the people to be secured that it shall continue no
longer then there is really a warr — and the charges thereof to be
I. sc. £40,000 each.
444
paid. He told me that one year of the late Dutch war cost 1623000l.
Thence to my Lord Chancellors, and there stayed long with Sir W.
Batten and Sir J. Mennes to speak with my Lord about our Prize
Office business; but being sick and full of visitants, we could not
speak with him, and so away home. Where Sir Rd. Ford did meet
us, with letters from Holland this day that it is likely the Duch fleet
will not come out this year; they have not victuals to keep them out,
and it is likely they will be frozen before they can get back. So home
to supper, where troubled to hear my poor boy Tom hathafit of the
stone, or some other pain like it. I must consult Mr. Holliard for
him. So at one in the morning, home to bed.