1664-04-13

To St. James — where I found Mr. Coventry (the Duke being
now come thither for the summer) with a goldsmith, sorting out
his old plate to change for new; but Lord, what a deal he hath. I
stayed and had two or three hours discourse with him — talking
about the disorders of our office, andI largely to tell how things are
carried by Sir W. Batten and Sir
J.Mennes to my great grief. He
seems much concerned also, and for all the King’s matters that are
done after the same rate everywhere else, and even the Dukes
household matters too — generally with corruption, but most
endeed with neglect and indifference. I spoke very loud and clear to
him my thoughts of Sir
J.Mennes and the other, and trust him with
the using of them. Then to talk of our business with the Dutch; he
tells me fully that he believes it will not come to a warr. For first he
showed me a letter from Sir George Downing! his own hand,
where he assures him that the Dutch themselfs do not desire but
above all things fear it. And that they neither have given letters of
Mart against our ships in Guinny, nor doth De Ruyter stay at home
with his fleet with an eye to any such thing, but for want of a wind,
and is now come out and is going to the Streights. He tells me also
that the most he expects is that upon the merchants’ complaints, the
parliament will represent them to the King, desiring his securing of
his subjects against them. And though perhaps they may not
directly see fit, yet even this will be enough to let the Dutch know
that the Parliament do not oppose the King; and by that means take
away their hopes, which was that the King of England could not get
money or do anything towards a war with them. He tells me also
that the Dutch States are in no good order themselfs, differing one
with another. And that for certain none but the States of Holland
1. Ambassador to the United Provinces.
o7a
and Zealand will contribute towards a war, the other reckoning
themselfs, being inland, not concerned in the profits of war or
peace. But it is pretty to see what he says. That those here that are
forward for a war at Court, they are reported in the world to be
only designers of getting money into the King’s hands. They that
elsewhere are for it have a design to trouble the kingdom and to give
the fanatics an opportunity of doing hurt. And lastly, those that are
against it (as he himself for one is very cold therein) are said to be
bribed by the Dutch.