1664-03-29

Upand by coach with Sir W. Pen to Charing cross, and there I
light and to Sir Ph. Warwicke to visit him and discourse with him
about navy business, whichI did at large—and he most largely with
me, not only about the navy but about the general Revenue of
England, above two hours I think, many staying all the while
without; but he seemed to take pains to let me either understand the
affairs of the Revenue or else to be a wittnesse of his pains and care in
stating of it. He showed me endeed many excellent collections of
the state of the Revenue in former Kings and the late times and the
present. He showed me how the very Assessements between 1643
and 1659, which was taxes (besides Excize, Customes, Sequestra-
cions, Decimacions, King and Queenes and Church lands, or
anything else but just the assessements) come to above 15 Millions.
He showed me a discourse of his concerning the Revenues of this
and foreign States. How that of Spayne was great, but divided with
his kingdoms and so came to little. How that of France did and doth
much exceed ours before for quantity; and that it is at the will of the
Prince to tax what he will upon his people; which is not here. That
the Hollanders have the best manner of tax, which is only upon the
expense of provisions, by an excize; and doth conclude that no
other tax is proper for England but a pound rate or excize upon the
expense of provisions. He showed me every perticular sort of
payment away of money since the King’s coming in to this day; and
told me, from one to one, how little he hath receivedof profit from
most of them, and I believe him truly. That the 1200000! which the
parliament with so much ado did first vote to give the King, and
since hath been re-examined by several committees of the present
parliament, is yet above 300000! short of making up really to the
King the 1200000! — as by perticulars he showed me. And in my
Lord Treasurer’s excellent letter to the King upon this subject, he
359
1664 29 February—2 March
tells the King how it was the spending more then the revenue that
did give the first occasion of his father’s ruine, and did since to
the Rebells; who he says, just like Henry the 8, had great and
sudden encrease of wealth, but yet by over-spending both died
poor. And further tells the King how much of this 1200000!
depends upon the life of the Prince and so must be renewed by
parliament again to his Successor; which is seldom done without
parting with some of the prerogatives of the Crown; or, if denied
and he persists to take it of the people, it gives occasion to a Civill
war, which may, as it did in the late business of Tonnage and
Poundage, prove fatal to the Crowne. He showed me how many
ways the Lord Treasurer did take before he moved the King to
Farme the Customes in the manner he doth, and the reasons that
moved him to do it. He showed me a very excellent argument to
prove that our Importing lesse then we export doth not impover-
ish the kingdom, according to the received opinion — which
though it be a paradox and that I do not remember the argument,
yet methought there was a great deal in what he said; and upon
the whole, I find him a most exact and methodicall man and of
great industry. And very glad that he thought fit to show me all
this, though I cannot easily guess the reason why he should do it
to me — unless from the plainness that he sees I use to him in
telling him how much the King may suffer for our want of
understanding the case of our Treasury.
-*#MARCH%-
2. To the office till dinner; and after dinner, my wife to cut my
hair short, which is grown pretty long again. And then to the office
and there till 9 at night doing business. This afternoon we had a
good present of tongues and Bacon from Mr. Shales of Ports-
mouth. So at night home to supper; and being troubled with my
eye, to bed. This morning Mr. Burgby, one of the writing clerks
belonging to the Council, was with me about business, a knowing
man. He complains how most of the Lords of the Council do look
after themselfs and their own ends and none the public, unless Sir
Edw. Nicholas. Sir G. Carteret is diligent, but all for his own ends
and profit. My Lord Privy Seale, a destroyer of everybody’s
business and doth no good at all to the public. The Archbishop of
360
Canterbury speaks very little nor doth much, being now come to
the highest pitch that he can expect. He tells me he believes that
things will go very high against the Chancellor by Digby, and that
bad things will be proved. Talks much of his neglecting the King
and making the King to trot every day to him, when he is well
enough to go to visit his Cosen, Chief Justice Hide, but not to the
Council or King. He commends my Lord of Ormond mightily in
Ireland; but cries out cruelly of Sir G. Lane for his corruption and
that he hath done my Lord great dishonour by selling of places here,
which are now all taken away and the poor wretches ready to
starve. That nobody almost understands or judges of business
better then the King, if he would not be guilty of his father’s fault,
to be doubtful of himself and easily be removed from his own
opinion. That my Lord Lauderdale is never from the King’s eare
nor counsel and that he is a most cunning fellow. Upon the whole,
that he finds things go very bad everywhere; and even in the
Council, nobody minds the public.