1664-04-26

Up very betimes, and to my office and there read over some
1. Against the nonconformists.
370
26 March 1664
papers against a meeting by and by at this office of Mr. Povy, Sir W.
Rider, Creed, Vernat[y] and Mr. Gauden about my Lord Peterbor-
ough’s accounts for Tanger — wherein we proceeded a good way;
but Lord, to see how ridiculous Mr. Povy is in all he says or doth;
not like a man nor fit for to be in such imployments as he is, and
perticularly that of a Treasurer (paying many and very great sums
without the least written order), as he is to be King of England. And
seems but this day, after much discourse of mine, to be sensible of
that part of his folly, besides a great deal more in other things. That
being done — Sir
J.Mennes andI sat all the morning; and then I to
the Change and there got a way, by pretence of business with my
Uncle Wight, to put off Creed, whom I had invited to dinner; and
so home and there find Madam Turner, her Daughter The[oph].,
Joyce Norton, my father and Mr. Honywood, and by and by
comes my uncle Wight and aunt — this being my solemn feast for
my cutting of the stone, it being now, blessed be God, this day six
yeares since that time. And I bless God I do in all respects find
myself free from that disease or any signs of it, more then that upon
the least cold I continue to have pain in making water, by gathering
of wind and growing costive — till which be removed I am at no
ease; but without that, I am very well. Dinner not being presently
ready, I spent some time myself and showed them a map of Tanger,
left this morning at my house by Creed, cut by our order, the
Comissioners, new drawn by Jonas Moore -— which is very pleasant
and I purpose to have it finely set out and hung up. After dinner Sir
W. Batten sent to speak with me and told me that he had proffered
our bill! today in the House; and that it was read without any
dissenters and he fears not but will pass very well — whichI shall be
glad of. He tells me also how, upon occasion of some prentices
being put in the pillory today for beating of their master, or some
suchlike thing, in Cheapeside — a company of prentices came and
rescued them and pulled down the Pillory; and they being set up
again, did the like again. So that the Lord Mayor and Maj.-Gen.
Browne was fain to come and stay there to keep the peace; and
drums all up and down the City was beat to raise the train-bands for
to quiet the town. And by and by going out with my Uncle and
Aunt Wight by coach with my wife through Cheapside (the rest of
the company, after much content and mirth, being broke up), we
saw a trained-band stand in Cheapside upon their guard. We went
1. Empowering the officers of the Navy Board to act as magistrates in the City.
371
1664 26 March-1 April
much against my uncles will as far almost as Hyde park, he and my
aunt falling out all the way about it, which vexed me. But all was
peace again presently. And so it raining very fast, we met many
brave coaches coming from the park, and so we turned and set them
down at home; and so home ourselfs and ended the day with great
content — to think how it hath pleased the Lord in six years time to
raise me from a condition of constant and dangerous and most
painful sickness and low condition and poverty to a state of constant
health almost — great honour and plenty, for which the Lord God of
Heaven make me truly thankful. My wife found her gown come
home laced; which is indeed very handsome but will cost mea great
deal of money, more than ever I intended — but it is but for once. So
to the office and did business; and then home and to bed.
31. My head of late mighty full of business, and with good
content to myself in it; though sometimes it troubles me that
nobody else but I should bend themselfs to serve the King with that
diligence, whereby much of my pains proves ineffectual.
~%APRILL#-~
1. Up and to my office, where busy till noon; and then to the
Change — where I find all the merchants concerned with the
presenting their complaints to the committee of Parliament
appointed to receive them this afternoon against the Dutch. So
home to dinner and thence by coach, setting my wife down at the
New Exchange; I to Whitehall and coming too soon for the Tanger
Committee, walked to Mr. Blagrave for a song Ileft long ago there.
Back to Whitehall and in the Gallery met the Duke of Yorke (Ialso
saw the Queene going to the parke and her maids of honour; she
herself look ill, and methinks Mrs. Stewart is grown fatter and not
so fair as she was) and he called me to him and discourse a good
while with me; and after he was gone twice or thrice, stayed and
called me again to him the whole length of the Howse. And at last
talked of the Dutch; and I perceive doth much wish that the
Parliament will find reason to fall out with them. He gone, Iby and
by find that the Comissioners of Tanger met at the Duke of
Albemarles, and so I have lost my labour. So with Creed to the
Change and there took up my wife and left him, and we two home,
372
and I to walk in the garden with W. Howe, whom we took up, he
having been to see us. He tells me how Creede hath been questioned
before the Council about a letter that hath been met with, wherein
he is mentioned by some fanatiques as a serviceable friend to them;
but he says he acquitted himself well in it. But however, something
sticks against him, he says, with my Lord; at which I am not very
sorry, for I believe he is a false fellow. I walked with him to Pauls,
he telling me how my Lord is little at home — minds his carding and
little else — takes little notice of anybody; but that he doth not think
that he is displeased, as I fear, with me; but is strange to all — which
makes me the less troubled. So walked back home, and late at the
office; so home and to bed. This day Mr. Turner did lend me, as a
rarity, a manuscript of one Mr. Wells, writ long ago, teaching the
method of building a ship; which pleases me mightily. I was at it
tonight but durst not stay long at it, I being come to have a great
pain and water in my eyes after candlelight.