1664-12-15

Called up very betimes by Mr. Cholmly, and with him a good
449
while about some of his Tanger accounts. And discoursing of the
condition of Tanger, he did give me the whole account of the
difference between FitzGerald and Norwood; which were very
high on both sides, but most imperious and base onFitz. Gerald’s.
And yet, through my Lord Fitzharding’s means, the Duke of Yorke
is led rather to blame Norwood and to speak that he should be called
home, then be sensible of the other. It seems, of all mankind there is
no man so led by another as the Duke is by my Lord Muskerry and
this FitzHarding. Insomuch, as when the King would have him to
be Privy purse, the Duke wept and said, ‘“‘But, Sir, I must have your
promise, ifyou will have my dear Charles from me, that ifever you
have occasion for an army again, I may have him with me” —
believing him to be the best commander of an army in the world.
But Mr. Cholmly thinks, as all other men I meet with do, that he is
a very ordinary fellow. It is strange how the Duke also doth love
naturally and affect the Irish above the English. He, of the company
he carried with him to sea, took above two-thirds Irish and French.
He tells me the King doth hate my Lord Chancellor. And that they,
that is the King and my Lord Fitzharding, do laugh at him fora dull
fellow; and in all this business of the Duch war doth nothing by his
advice, hardly consulting him. Only, he is a good minister in other
respects, and the King cannot be without him; but above all, being
the Dukes father-in-law, he is kept in; otherwise, Fitzharding were
able to fling down two of him. This all the wise and grave lords see,
and cannot help it but yield to it. He being gone, I abroad to the
carriers to see some things sent away to my father against
Christmas; and I thence to Moorefields, and there up and down to
several houses to drink, to look for a place pour rancontrer la
femme de je sais quoy against next Monday, but could meet none;
but so to the Coffee-house, where great talk of the Comett seen in
several places and among our men at sea and by my Lord Sandwich,
to whom Iintend to write about it tonight. Thence home to dinner;
and then to the office, where all the afternoon; and in the evening
home to supper, and then to the office late, and so to bed. This night
I begun to burn wax candles in my closet at the office, to try the
charge and to see whether the smoke offends like that of tallow
candles.