1664-05-29

Sunday. Whitsunday. Kings Birth and Restauracion day. Up; and
having receiveda
letter last night, desiring it from Mr. Coventry, I
walked to St. James; and there he and I did long discourse together
of the business of the office and the war with the Dutch and he
seemed to argue mightily with the little reason that there is for all
this. He doth, as to the effect of the war, tell me clearly that it is not
any skill of the Dutch that can hinder our trade ifwe will, we having
so many advantages over them, of Windes, good ports, and men.
But it is our pride and the laziness of the merchant. He seems to
think that there may be some Negotiacion which may hinder a war
this year; but that he speaks doubtfully, as unwilling, I perceive, to
be thought to discourse any such thing. The main thing he desired
to speak with me about was to know whether I do understand my
Lord Sandwiches intentions as to going to sea with this fleet; saying
387
that the Duke, ifhe desires it, is most willing to it; but thinking that
twelve ships is nota fleet fit for my Lord to be troubled to go out
with, he is not willing to offer it him till he hath some intimations of
his mind to go or not. He spoke this with very great respect as to my
Lord, though methinks it is strange they should not understand one
another better at this time then to need another’s mediacion.
Thence walked over the park to Whitehall, Mr. Povy with me, and
was taken in a very great showre in the middle of the park, that we
were very wet. So up into the House and with him to the King’s
closet, whither by and by the King came, my Lord Sandwich
carrying the sword. A Bishop preached; but he speaking too low
for me to hear behind the King’s closet, I went forth and walked and
discoursed with Coll. Reames, who seems a very willing man to be
informed in his business of Canvas, which he is undertaking to
strike in with us to serve the Navy. By and by my Lord Sandwich
came forth and called me to him; and we fell into discourse a great
while about his business, wherein he seems to be very open with me
and to receive my opinion as he used to do; and I hopeI shall
become necessary to him again. He desired me to think of the
fitness or not for him to offer himself to go to sea, and to give him
my thoughts in a day or two. Thence, after sermon, among the
ladies on the Queenes side; where I saw Mrs. Stuart, very fine and
pretty but far beneath my Lady Castlemaine. Thence with Mr.
Povy home to dinner, where extraordinary cheer. And after dinner,
up and down to see his house. And in a word, methinks for his
perspective upon his wall in his garden and the springs rising up —
with the perspective in the little closet — his room floored above
with woods of several colours, like, but above the best Cabinet
work Iever saw —his grotto and vault, with his bottles of wine and a
well therein to keep them cool — his furniture of all sorts — his bath at
the top of his house — good pictures and his manner of eating and
drinking, doth surpass all that ever I did see of one man in all my
life.