1664-01-11

Waked this morning by 4 a-clock by my wife, to call the
maids to their wash. And what through my sleeping so long last
night and vexation for the lazy sluts lying so long against their great
wash, neither my wife nor I could sleep one winke after that time till
day; and then I rose and by coach (taking Capt. Grove with me and
three bottles of Tent, which I sent to Mrs. Lane by my promise on
Saturday night last) to Whitehall and there with the rest of our
company to the Duke and did our business; and thence I to the
Tennis Court till noon and there saw several great matches played;
and so by invitation to St. James’s, where at Mr. Coventry’s
chamber I dined with my Lord Barkely, Sir G. Carteret, Sir Edwd.
Turner, Sir Ellis Layton, and one Mr. Seymour, a fine gentleman;
where admirable good discourse of all sorts, pleasant and serious.
Thence after dinner to Whitehall; where the Duke being busy at the
Guinny business — the Duke of Albemarle, Sir W. Rider, Povy, Sir
J. Lawson and I to the Duke of Albemarle’s lodgings and there did
some business; and so to the Court again and I to the Duke of
Yorkes lodgings, where the Guinny Company are choosing their
Assistants for the next year by balletting. Thence by coach with Sir
J. Robinson, Lieutenant of the Tower; he set me down at Cornhill;
but Lord, the simple discourse that all the way we had, he
magnifying his great undertakings and cares that have been upon
him for these last two years, and how he commanded the City to
the content of all parties, when the loggerhead knows nothing
almost that is sense. Thence to the Coffee-house, whither comes Sir
W. Petty and Capt. Grant, and we fell in talk (besides a young
gentleman I suppose a merchant, his name Mr. Hill, that hath
travelled and I perceive is a master in most sorts of Musique and
other things) of Musique, the Universall Character — art of
Memory — Granger’s counterfeiting of hands — and other most
excellent discourses, to my great content, having not been in so
good company a great while. And had I time I should covett the
342
acquaintance of that Mr. Hill. This morning I stood by the King,
arguing with a pretty Quaker woman that delivered to him a desire
of hers in writing. The King showed her SirJ. Minnes, as a man the
fittest for her quaking religion, saying that his beard was the stiffest
thing about him. And again merrily said, looking upon the length
of her paper, that ifall she desired was of that length, she might lose
her desires. She modestly saying nothing till he begun seriously to
discourse with her, arguing the truth of his spirit against hers. She
replying still with these words, ‘“‘O King!”, and thou’d him all
along.