1664-10-29

Michaelmas day. Up, and to the office, where all the morning.
Dined at home and Creed with me. After dinner I to Sir G.
Carteret, and with him to his new house he is taking in
Broadstreete; and there surveyed all the rooms and bounds in order
to the drawing upalease thereof. And that done, Mr Cutler (his
landlord) took me up and down and showed me all his ground and
houses, which is extraordinary great, he having bought all the
Augustin fryers; and many many a 1000/ he hath and will bury
there. So home to my business, clearing my papers and preparing
my accounts against tomorrow for a monthly and a great Auditt.
So to supper and to bed. Fresh newes came of our beating the Dutch
at Guiny quite out of all their castles almost, which will make them
quite mad here at home, sure. And Sir G. Carteret did tell me that
the King doth joy mightily at it; but asked him, laughing, “But,”
says he, “‘how shall I do to answer this to the Embassador, when he
comes?” Nay, they say that we have beat them out of the New
Netherlands too — so that we have been doing them mischiefe a
great while in several parts of the world, without public knowledge
or reason. Their Fleete for Guinny is now, they say, ready and
abroad, and will be going this week. Coming home tonight, I did
go to examine my wife’s house-accounts; and finding things that
seemed somewhat doubtful, I was angry, though she did make it
pretty plain; but confessed that when she doth misse a sum, she
doth add something to other things to make it. And upon my being
very angry, she doth protest she will here lay up something for
herself to buy her a neckelace with — which madded me and doth
still trouble me, for I fear she will forget by degrees the way of
living cheap and undera sense of want.
427
1664 30 September—2 October
30. Up, and all day, both morning and afternoon, at my accounts,
it being a great month both for profit and layings-out — the last
being 89/ — for kitchen, and clothes for myself and wife, and a few
extraordinaries for the house. And my profits, besides salary, 239.
So that I have this week, notwithstanding great layings-out (and
preparations for laying-out, which I make as paid this month), my
balance doth come to 1203/— for which the Lord’s name be praised.
—+OCTOBERY-
1. Up and at the office both forenoon and afternoon, very busy,
and with great pleasure in being so. This morning, Mrs. Lane (now
Martin) like a foolish woman came to the Hors shoo hard by, and
sent for me while I was at the office to come to speak with her, by a
note sealed up—I know, to get me to do something for her husband;
but Isent her an answer that I would see her at Westminster. And so
I did not go, and she went away, poor soul. At night home to
supper, weary and my eyes sore with writing and reading — and to
bed. We go now on with great Vigour in preparing against the
Dutch, who they say will now fall upon us without doubt, upon
this high news come of our beating them so wholly inGuiny.
2. Lords day. My wife not being well to go to church, I walked
with my boy through the City, putting in at several churches;
among others, at Bishopsgate, and there saw the picture usually put
before the King’s book, put up in the church; but very ill painted,
though it were a pretty piece to set up in a church. I entended to
have seen the Quakers, who they say do meet every Lord’s day at
the Mouth at Bishopsgate; but I could see none stirring, nor was it
fit to ask for the place. So I walked over Moorefields, and thence to
Clerkenwell church and there (as I wished) sat next pew to the fair
Butler, who endeed is a most perfect beauty still. And oneI do very
much admire myself for my choice of her fora beauty — she having
the best lower part of her face that ever I saw all days of my life.
After church I walked to my Lady Sandwiches through my Lord
Southamptons new buildings in the fields behind Grays Inn; and
endeed they are very great and a noble work. So I dined with my
Lady; and the same innocent discourse that we used to have. Only,
after dinner, being alone, she asked me my opinion about Creed,
428
whether he would have a wife or no and what he was worth, and
proposed Mrs. Wright for him; which she says she heard he was
once enquiring after. She desired I would take a good time and
manner of proposing it; and I said I would, though I believed he
would love nothing but money, and much was not to be expected
there she said. So away back to Clerkenwell church, thinking to
have got sight of la belle Boteler again, but failed; and so after
church walked all over the fields home; and there my wife was
angry with me for not coming home and for gadding abroad to
look after beauties, she told me plainly; so I made all peace, and to
supper. This evening came Mrs. Lane (now Martin) with her
husband to desire my help about a place for him; it seems poor Mr.
Daniel is dead, of the Victualling Office — a place too good for this
puppy to fallow him in — but I did give him the best words I could;
and so after drinking a glass of wine, sent them going, but with
great kindness. So to supper, prayers, and to bed.