1664-02-28

Lords day. Up and walked to Pauls; and by chance it was an
extraordinary day for the Readers of the Inns of Court and all the
students to come to church, it being an old ceremony not used these
25 years — upon the first Sunday in Lent. Abundance there was of
students, more then there was room to seat but upon forms, and the
Church mighty full. One Hawkins preached, an Oxford man —a
good sermon upon these words: “But the wisdom from above is
first pure, then peaceable.’’ Both before and after sermon I was
most impatiently troubled at the Quire, the worst that ever I heard.
But what was extraordinary, the Bishop of London, who sat there
in a pew made a-purpose for him by the pulpitt, doth give the last
blessing to the congregation — which was, he being a comely old
man, a very decent thing methought. The Lieutenant of the Tower,
Sir
J.Robinson, would needs have me by coach home with him;
and sending word home to my house, I did go and dine with him,
his ordinary table being very good — and his Lady a very high-
carriaged but comely big woman; I was mightily pleased with her.
His officers of his Regiment dined with him. No discourse at table
to any purpose. Only, after dinner my Lady would needs see a boy
which was represented to her to be an innocent country boy,
brought up to town a day or two ago and left here to the wide
world, and he losing his way, fell into the Tower; and which my
Lady believes and takes pity of him and will keep him; but though a
little boy and but young, yet he tells his tale so readily and answers
all Que[s]tions so wittily, that for certain he is an arch rogue and
bred in this town. But my Lady will not believe it, but ordered
victuals to be given him — and I think will keep him as a footboy for
their eldest son. After dinner to Chappell in the Tower with the
Lieutenant, with the Keyes carried before us and the Warders and
gentleman Porter going before us. AndI sat with the Lieutenant in
his pew in great state, but slept all the sermon. None, it seems, of
the prisoners in the Tower that are there now, though they may,
358
will come to prayers there. Church being done, I back to Sir Johns
house, and there left him and home; and by and by to Sir Wm. Pen
and stayed a while talking with him about Sir
J.Mennes his folly in
his office, of which I am sick and weary to speak of it; and how the
King is abused in it — though Pen, I know, offers the discourse only
like a rogue to get it out of me; but Iam very free to tell my mind to
him in the case, being not unwilling he should tell him again if he
will, or anybody else. Thence home and walked in the garden by
brave Mooneshine with my wife above two hours, till past 8
a’-clock; then to supper, and after prayers to bed.