1664-09-16

Upbetimes and to my office, where all the morning very busy
putting papers to rights. And among other things, Mr. Gauden
coming to me, I had a good opportunity to speak to him about his
present, which hitherto hath been a burden to me, that I could not
do it, because I was doubtful that he meant it as a temptation to me
to stand by him in the business of Tangier victualling. But he clears
me it was not, and that he values me and my proceedings therein
very highly — being but what became me; and that what he did was
for my old kindnesses to him in despatching of his business — which
I was glad to hear; and with my heart in good rest and great joy,
parted and to my business again. At noon to the Change, where by
appointment I met Sir W. Warren; and afterward to the Sun tavern,
where he brought to me, being all alone, a rool in a bag; which I
offered him to give him my receipt for, but he told me no, it was my
owne, which he hadalittle while since promised me and was glad
that (as I had told him two days since) it would now do me
courtesy. And so most kindly he did give it me, and I as joyfully,
425
even out of myself, carried it home in a coach —he himself expressly
taking care that nobody might see this business done, though I was
willing enough to have carried a servant with me to have received it;
but he advised me to do it myself. So home with it and to dinner.
After dinner, Iforth with my boy to buy several things, Stooles and
Andirons and candlesticks, &c., household stuff. And walked to
the Mathematical instrument-maker in Moorefields and bought a
large pair of compasses. And there met Mr. Pargiter, and he would
needs have me to drink a cup of Horseredish ale, which he and a
friend of his, troubled with the stone, have been drinking of —
which we did, and then walked into the fields as far almost as Sir G.
Whitmores, all the way talking of Russia — which he says is a sad
place; and though Mosco is a very great city, yet it is, from the
distance between house and house, and few people compared with
this — and poor sorry houses, the Emperor himself living in a
wooden house —his exercise only flying a hawke at pigeons and
carrying pigeons ten or twelve mile off and then laying wagers
which pigeon shall come soonest home to her house. All the winter
within doors, some few playing at Chesse but most drinking their
time away. Women live very slavishly there. And it seems, in the
Emperor’s Court no room hath above two or three windows, and
those the greatest not a yard wide or high — for warmth in winter
time. And that the general cure for all diseases there is their
sweating-houses — or people that are poor, they get into their ovens,
being heated, and there lie. Little learning among things of any sort
— not a man that speaks Latin, unless the Secretary of State by
chance. Mr. Pargiter and Iwalked to the Change together and there
parted; and so I to buy more things and then home; and afteralittle
at my office — home to supper and to bed.