1664-02-09

Up and to the office, where sat all the morning. At noon by
coach with Mr. Coventry to the Change, where busy with several
people. Great talk of the Duch proclaiming themselfs in India lords
of the Southern Seas and deny traffique there to all ships but their
own, upon pain of confiscation —.which makes our merchants mad.
Great doubt of two ships of ours, the Greyhound and another very
rich, coming from the Streights, for fear of the Turkes. By and by
comes Mr. Moore, with whom much good discourse of my Lord;
and among other things, told me that my Lord is mightily altered,
that is, grown very high and stately and doth not admit of any to
come into his chamber to him as heretofore; and that I must not
think much of his strangeness to me, for it was the same he doth to
everybody. And that he would not have me to be solicitous in the
matter, but keep off and give him now and then avisit and no more,
for he says he himself doth not go to him nowadays but when he
sends for him, nor then doth not stay for him ifhe be not there at the
hour appointed. “For,” says he, “I do find that Ican stand upon my
own legs and I will not by an over-submission make myself cheap
to anybody and contemptible”? — which was the doctrine of the
world that Ilacked most — and shall fallow it. I discoursed with him
about my money that my Lord hath and the 1000! that I stand
350
g—17 February 1664
bound with him in to my Cosen Tho. Pepys, in both which I will
get myself at liberty as soon as I can — for I do not like his being
angry and in debt both together to me; and besides, I do not
perceive he looks after paying his debts, but runs farther and farther
in.
11. Up, and after much pleasant discourse with my wife, and to
the office, where we sat all the morning and did much business, and
some much to my content, by prevailing against Sir W. Batten for
the King’s profit. At noon home to dinner my wife and I, hand-to-
_ fist to a very fine pig. This noon Mr. Falconer came and visited my
wife and brought hera present, a silver state-cup and cover, value
about 3 or 4l. He did not stay dinner with me. I am almost sorry for
this present, because I would have reserved him for a place to go in
summer a-visiting at Woolwich with my wife.
15. Up;and carrying my wife to my Lord’s lodgings, left her and
I to Whitehall to the Duke; where he first put on a periwigg today
but methought his hair, cut short in order thereto, did look very
prettily of itself before he put on his periwig. Thence to his closet
and did our business. And thence Mr. Coventry and I down to his
chamber and spenta little time; and so parted and I took my wife
homeward, Istopping at the Coffeehouse and thence a while to the
Change (where great news of the arrivall of two rich ships, the
Greyhound and another, which they were mightily afeared of and
great insurance given); and so home to dinner and after an hour
with my wife at her globes, I to the office, where very busy till 11 at
night; and so home to supper and to bed. This afternoon Sir Tho.
Chamberlin came to the office to me and showed me several letters
from the East Indys, showing the heighth that the Dutch are come
to there; showing scorn to all the English even in our only Factory
there of Surratt, beating several men and hanging the English
Standard St. George under the Duch flag in scorn; saying that
whatever their masters do or say at home, they will do what they
list and will be masters of all the world there, and have so
proclaimed themselfs Soveraigne of all the South Seas — which
certainly our King cannot endure, if the parliament will give him
money. But I doubt and yet do hope they will not yet, till we are
more ready for it.
17. Up, and with my wife, setting her down by her father’s in
351
1664 17 February
Long acre, in so ill-looked a place, among all the bawdy-houses,
that I was troubled at it to see her go thither. Thence I to Whitehall
and there walked up and down, talking with Mr. Pierce, who tells
me of the King’s giving of my Lord Fitzharding two leases, which
belongs endeed to the Queene, worth 20000! to him, and how
people do talk of it — and other things of that nature, which I am
sorry to hear. He and I walked round the parke with great pleasure
and back again; and finding no time to speak with my Lord of
Albemarle, I walked to the Change and there met my wife at our
pretty Dolls and so took her home, and Creed also, whom I met
there, and sent her home while Creed and I stayed on the Change;
and by and by home and dined — where I found an excellent
Mastiffe, his name Towzer, sent me by a surgeon. After dinner I
took my wife again by coach (leaving Creed by the way, going to
Gresham College, of which he is now become one of the Virtuosos)
and to Whitehall, where I delivered a paper about Tanger to my
Lord Duke of Albemarle in the council chamber; and so to Mrs.
Hunts to call my wife, and so by coach straight home and at my
office till 3 a-clock in the morning — having spent much time this
evening in discourse with Mr. Cutler, who tells me how the Dutch
deal with us abroad and do not value us anywhere. And how he and
Sir W. Rider have found reason to lay aside Capt. Cocke in their
company, he having played some indiscreet and unfair tricks with
them, and hath lost himself everywhere by his imposing upon all
the world with the conceit he hath of his own wit. And so hath, he
tells me, Sir Rd. Ford also, both of whom are very witty men. He
being gone, Sir W. Rider come and stayed with me till about 12 at
night, having found ourselfs work till that time about understand-
ing the measuring of Mr. Woods masts; which thoughI did so well
before as to be thought to deal very hardly against Wood, yet 1am
ashamed I understood it no better and do hope yet, whatever be
thought of me, to save the King some more money. And out of an
impatience to break up with my head full of confused confounded
notions but nothing brought to a clear comprehension, I was
resolved to set up, and did, till now it is ready to strike 4 a-clock, all
alone, cold, and my candle not enough left to light me to my own
house; and so, with my business however brought to some good
understanding and set it down pretty clear, I went home to bed,
with my mind at good quiet and the girle setting up for me (the rest
all a-bed); I eat and drank a little and to bed, weary, sleepy, cold,
and my head akeing.
352
18-19. Called up to the office; and much against my will, I rose,
my head akeing mightily — and to the office, where I did argue to
good purpose for the King what I have been fitting myself for the
last night against Mr. Wood, about his masts; but brought it to no
issue. Very full of business till noon, and then with Mr. Coventry
to the Affrican house and there fell to my Lord Peterborough’s
accounts; and by and by to dinner, where excellent discourse — Sir
G. Carteret and other of the Affrican Company with us. And then
up to the accounts again, which were by and by done; and then I
straight home, my head in great pain and drowzy; so after doing a
little business at the office and wrote to my father about sending
him the mastiffe was given me yesterday, I home and by daylight to
bed, about 6 a-clock, and fell to sleep. Wakened about 12 when my
wife came to bed, and then to sleep again and so till morning, and
then up in good order in my head again; and shaved myself and then
to the office, whither Mr. Cutler came and walked and talked with
me a great while, and then to the Change together; and it being
early, did tell me several excellent examples of men raised upon the
Change by their great diligence and saving — as also his own fortune
and how Credit grew upon him; that when he was not really worth
11001, he had credit for 1000001 — of Sir W. Rider, how he ris — and
others.