1664-07-15

Up, and to my Lord Sandwiches; where he sent for me up. He
begun to tell me that he had now pitched upon his day of going to
sea, upon Monday next; and that he would now give me an account
how matters are with him. He told me that his work now in the
world is only to keep up his interest at Court, having little hopes to
get more considerably; he saying that he hath now about 8000! per
annum. It is true, he says, he oweth about 10000/. But he hath been
at great charges in getting things to this pass in his estate — besides
his building and goods that he hath bought. He says he hath now
evened his reckonings at the Wardrobe till Michaelmas last, and
hopes to finish it to Lady-day before he goes. He says, now there is
due too, 7000! to him there, if he knew how to get it paid. He says
he is as great with the Chancellor, or greater, then ever in his life.
404.
15 July 1664
That with the King he is the like; and told me an instance, that
whereas he formerly was of the private council to the King before
he was last sick, and that by that sickness an interruption was made
in his attendance upon him, the King did not constantly call him, as
he used to do, to his private council, only in businesses of the sea
and the like; but of late, the King did send a message to him by Sir
Hary Bennet, to excuse the King to my Lord that he had not of late
sent for him as he used to do to his private council, for it was not out
of any distaste, but to avoid giving offence to some others, whom
he did not name but my Lord supposes it might be Prince Rupert,
or it may be only that the King would rather pass it by an excuse
then be thought unkind. But that now he did desire him to attend
him constantly; which he hath of late done, and the King never
more kind to him in his life then now. The Duke of Yorke, as much
as is possible; and in the business of late, when I was to speak to my
Lord about his going to sea, he says that he finds the Duke did it
with the greatest ingenuity and love in the world; and hath caused in
his commission that he be made Admirall of this and what other
ships or fleets shall hereafter be put out after these — which is very
noble. He tells me, in these cases and all others, he finds that bearing
of them patiently is his best way, without noise or trouble; and
things wear out of themselfs and come fair again. “But,” says he,
“take it from me never to trust too much to any man in the world,
for you put yourself into his power; and the best-seeming friend
and real friend as to the present may have or take occasion to fall out
with you; and then out comes all. This,” says he, “‘is the whole
condition of my estate and interest; whichI tell you because I know
not whether I shall see you again or no.”” Then as to the voyage, he
thinks it will be of charge to him, and no profit; but that he must not
now look after nor think to encrease, but study to make good what
he hath, that what is due to him from the Wardrobe or elsewhere
may be paid; which otherwise would fail, and all a man hath be but
small content to him. So we seemed to take leave one of another;
my Lord of me, desiring me that I would write to him and give him
information upon all occasions in matters that concern him —
which, put together with what he preambled with yesterday,
makes me think that my Lord doth truly esteem me still, and desires
to preserve my service to him — which I do bless God for. In the
middle of our discourse my Lady Crew came in to bring my Lord
Word that he hath another son, my Lady being brought to bed just
now. I did not think her time had been so nigh; but she is well
405
brought to bed, for which God be praised — and send my Lord to
study the laying up of something the more.