1664-02-02

Up and to the office; where, though Candlemass day, Mr.
Coventry, Sir W. Penn and [ are all the morning, the others being at
a Survey at Deptford; at noon by coach to the Change with Mr.
Coventry. Thence to the Coffee-house with Capt. Cocke, who
discoursed well of the good effects in some kind of a Duch war and
conquest (whichI did not consider before but the contrary); that is,
that the trade of the world is too little for us two, therefore one must
down. Secondly, that though our merchants will not be the better
husbands by all this, yet our Wool will bear a better prize by
vaunting of our cloths, and by that our tenants will be better able to
pay rents and our lands will be more worth, and all our own
manufactures — which now the Dutch out-vie us in. That he thinks
the Duch, are not in so good a condition as heretofore, because of
want of men always, and now from the wars against the Turke
more then ever. Thence to the Change again, and thence off to the
Sun taverne with Sir W. Warren and with him discoursed long and
had good advice and hints from him; and among [other] things, he
did give me a pair of gloves for my wife, wrapped up in paper;
which I would not open, feeling it hard, but did tell him my wife
should thank him, and so went on in discourse. When I came home,
Lord, in what pain I was to get my wife out of the room without
bidding her go, that I might see what these gloves were; and by and
by, she being gone, it proves a pair of white gloves for her and 40
pieces in good gold: which did so cheer my heart that I could eat no
victuals almost for dinner for joy to think how God doth bless us
every day more and more — and more yet I hope he wiil upon the
encrease of my duty and endeavours. I was at great loss what to do,
whether tell my wife of it or no; which I could hardly forbear, but
yet I did and will think of it first before I do, for fear of making her
think me to be in a better condition or in a better way of getting
money then yet I am. After dinner to the office, where doing
infinite of business till past 10 at night to the comfort of my mind;
and so home with joy to supper and to bed.