1664-01-04

Up betimes, and my wife being ready and her maid Besse and
the girl, I carried them by coach and set them all down in Covent
garden and there left them, and I to my Lord Sandwich[es]
lodgings, but he not being up, Ito the Dukes chamber, and there by
and by to his closet; where, since his lady was ill, a little red bed of
velvet is brought for him to lie alone, which is a very pretty one.
After doing business here, I to my Lord’s again and there spoke
with him, and he seems now almost friends again as he used to be.
Here meeting Mr. Pierce the surgeon, he told me, among other
Court news, how the Queene is very well again and the King lay
with her on Saturday night last. And that she speaks now very
pretty English and makes her sense out now and then with pretty
phrases — as among others, this is mightily cried up — that meaning
339
to say that she did not like such a horse so well as the rest, he being
too prancing and full of tricks, she said he did ‘“‘make too much
vanity.” Thence to the Tennice Court (after I had spent a little time
in Westminster hall, thinking to have met with Mrs. Lane, but I
could not and am glad of it) and there saw the King play at Tennis
and others. But to see how the King’s play was extolled without
any cause at all, was a loathsome sight, though sometimes endeed
he did play very well and deserved to be commended; but such open
flattery is beastly. Afterward to St. James’s park, being unwilling to
go to spend money at the ordinary, and there spent an hour or two,
it being a pleasant day, seeing people play at Pell Mell — where it
pleased me mightily to hear a gallant, lately come from France,
swear at one of his companions for suffering his man (a spruce
blade) to be so saucy as to strike a ball while his master was playing
on the Mall. Home — and at my office till 12 at night, making my
solemn vowes for the next year, which I trust in the Lord I shall
keep. But I fear I havealittle too severely bound myself in some
things and in too many, forI fear Imay forget some. But however, I
know the worst, and shall by the blessing of God observe to
perform or pay my forfeits punctually. So home and to bed — with
my mind at rest.