1664-04-08

Up betimes and to the office; and anon it begin to be fair, after a
great shower this morning; Sir W. Batten andI by water (calling his
son Castle by the way, between whom and I no notice at all of his
letter the other day to me) to Deptford; and after a turn in the yard, |
went with him to the Almeshouse to see the new building which he
with some ambition is building of there, during his being Maister of
Trinity house. And a good work it is; but to see how simply he
answered somebody concerning setting up the arms of the
corporation upon the door, that and anything else; he did not deny
it but said he would leave that to the Maister that comes after him.
There I left him and to the King’s yard again and there made good
enquiry into the business of the poop lanterns; wherein I find
occasion to correct myself mightily for what I have done in the
contract with the platerer and am resolved, though I know not
how, to make them to alter it, though they signed it last night. And
so Itook Stanes home with me by boat and discoursed it; and he will
come to reason when J can make him to understand it. No sooner
landed but it fell a mighty storm of rain and hayle; so I put into a
Cane shop and bought one to walk with, cost me 4s.- 6d. — all of one
Joynt. So home to dinner, and had an excellent Good friday dinner
of pease porridge — and apple pie. So to the office all the afternoon,
preparing a new book for my contracts. And this afternoon came
home the office globes, done to my great content. In the evening, a
little to visit Sir W. Pen, who hatha feeling this day or two of his old
pain. Then to walk in the garden with my wife, and so to my office
a while, and then home to the only Lenten supper I have had of
wiggs and ale. And so to bed. This morning betimes came to my
office to me Boatswain Smith of Woolwich, telling me a notable
piece of knavery of the officers of that yard and Mr. Gold, in behalf
of
a contract made for some old ropes by Mr. Wood. AndI believe I
shall find Sir W. Batten of the plot.