1664-03-18

Up betimes and walked to my brother’s, where a great while
putting things in order against anon. Then to Madam Turners and
eat a breakfast there. And so to Wotton my shoemaker and there
got a pair of shoes blacked on the soles, against anon for me. So to
my brother’s, and to the church and with the grave-maker chose a
place for my brother to lie in, just under my mother’s pew. But to
see how a man’s tombes are at the mercy of sucha
fellow, that for
6d. he would (as his own words were) “TI will justle them together
but I will make room for him” — speaking of the fullness of the
middle Isle where he was to lie. And that he would for my father’s
sake do my brother that is dead all the civility he can; which was to
disturb other corps that are not quite rotten to make room for him.
And methought his manner of speaking it was very remarkable —as
of
a thing that now was in his power to do a man a courtesy or not.
At noon my wife, though in pain, comes; but I being forced to go
home, she went back with me — where I dressed myself and so did
Besse; and so to my brother’s again — whither, though invited as the
custom is at I or 2 a-clock, they came not till 4 or 5. But at last, one
after another they came — many more thenI bid; and my reckoning
367
that I bid was 120, but I believe there was nearer 150. Their service
was six biscuits a-piece and what they pleased of burnt claret — my
Cosen Joyce Norton kept the wine and cakes above — and did give
out to them that served, who had white gloves given them. But
above all, Iam beholden to Mrs. Holding, who was most kind and
did take mighty pains, not only in getting the house and everything
else ready, but this day in going up and down to see the house filled
and served, in order to mine and their great content I think — the
men setting by themselfs in some rooms, and women by themselfs
in others — very close, but yet room enough. Anon to church,
walking out into the street to the Conduict and so across the street,
and had a very good company along with the Corps. And being
come to the grave as above, Dr. Pierson, the minister of the parish,
did read the service for buriall and so I saw my poor brother laid
into the grave; and so all broke up and I and my wife and Madam
Turner and her family to my brother’s, and by and by fell to a
barrell of oysters, Cake, and cheese of Mr. Honiwoods, with him in
his chamber and below — being too merry for so late a sad work; but
Lord, to see how the world makes nothing of the memory ofaman
an hour after he is dead. And endeed, I must blame myself; for
though at the sight of him, dead and dying, I had real grief for a
while, while he was in my sight, yet presently after and ever since, I
have had very little grief endeed for him. By and by, it beginning to
be late, I put things in some order in the house and so took my wife
and Besse (who hath done me very good service in cleaning and
getting ready everything and serving the wine and things today,
and is endeed a most excellent good-natured and faithful wench and
I love her mightily) by coach home; and so after being at the office
to set down this day’s work, home to supper and to bed.