1664-07-30

Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning. At noon
~ home to dinner, Mr. Wayth with me; and by and by comes in Mr.
Falconer and his wife and dined with us — the first time she was ever
here. We had a pretty good dinner — very merry in discourse. Sat
after dinner an hour or two. Then down by water to Deptford and
Woolwich about getting of some business done, which Iwas bound
to by my oath this month. Walked back from Woolwich to
Greenwich all alone, save a man that had a cudgell in his hand; and
though he told me he laboured in the King’s yards and many other
good arguments that he is an honest man, yet God forgive me, I did
doubt he might knock me on the head behind with his club — but I
got safe home. Then to the making-up my month’s accounts; and
find myself still a gainer and rose to 951/, for which God be blessed.
I end the month with my mind full of business and some sorrow
that I have not exactly performed all my vowes, though my not
1. As a consequence ofthe expulsions which followed the Act of Uniformity: see
above, p. 219 & n.
399
1664 30 June—2 July
doing is not my fault and shall be made good out of my first leisure.
Great doubts yet whether the Dutch war go on or no. The fleet
ready in the Hope, of twelve sail — the King and Queenes go on
board, they say, on Saturday next. Young children of my Lord
Sandwich gone with their maids from my mother’s; which troubles
me, it being, Ihear from Mr. Sheply, with great discontent — saying
that though they buy good meate, yet can never have it before it
stinks — which I am ashamed of.
~¢JULY%-
1. Up, and within all the morning - first bringing down my
Tryangle to my chamber below, having a new frame made proper
for it to stand on. By and by comes Dr. Burnett — who assures me
that I have an Ulcer either in the Kidnys or Blather; for my water,
which he saw yesterday, he is sure the Sediment is not slime
gathered by heat, but is a direct pusse. He did write me down some
direction what to do for it — but not with the satisfaction I expected.
I did give him a piece; with good hopes, however, that his advice
will be of use to me — though it is strange Mr. Hollyard should
never say one word of this ulcer in all his life to me. He being gone, I
to the Change and thence home to dinner; and so to my office, busy
till the evening; and then by agreement came Mr. Hill and Andrew
and one Cheswicke, a maister who plays very well upon the
Spinette, and we sat singing Psalms till 9 at night, and so broke up
with great pleasure; and very good company it is, and I hopeI shall
now and then have their company. They being gone, I to my office
till toward 12 a-clock, and then home and to bed. Upon the Change
this day Isaw how uncertain the Temper of the people is — that from
our discharging of about 200 that lay idle, having nothing to do
upon some of our ships which were ordered to be fitted for service
and their works are now done — the town doth talk that the King
discharges all his men, 200 yesterday and 800 today, and that now
he hath got 100000! in his hand, he values not a Dutch warr. But I
undeceived a great many, telling them how it is.
\
2. Up and to the office, where all the morning. At noon to the
Change; and there (which is strange) I could meet with nobody that
I could invite home to my venison pasty, but only Mr. Alsop and
400
Mr. Lanyon, whom I invited last night, and a friend they brought
along with them. So home; and with our venison pasty we had
other good meat and good discourse. After dinner sat close to
discourse about our business of the victualling of the garrison of
Tanger — taking their prices of all provisions; and I do hope to
order it so that they, and I also, may get something by it — which
doth much please me, for I hope I may get nobly and honestly,
with profit to the King. They being gone, came Sir W. Warren
and he and I discoursed long about the business of masts; and then
in the evening to the office, where late writing letters, and then
home to look over some Brampton papers, which I am under an
oath to despatch before I spend one half-hour in any pleasure or go
to bed before 12 a-clock; to which, by the grace of God I will be
true. Then to bed. When I came home, I found that tomorrow
being Sunday, I should gain nothing by doing it tonight, and
tomorrow I can do it very well and better then tonight: I went to
bed before my time, but with a resolution of doing the thing to
better purpose tomorrow.