1664-08-07

Lords day. Lay long, caressing my wife and talking — she telling
me sad stories of the ill, improvident, disquiet, and sluttish manner
that my father and mother and Pall live in the country; which
troubles me mightily and I must seek to remedy it. So up and ready
—and my wife also; and then down and I showed my wife, to her
great admiration and joy, Mr. Gaudens present of plate, the two
Flaggons; which endeed are so noble that I hardly can think that
they are yet mine. So blessing God for it, we down to dinner,
mighty pleasant; and so up after dinner for a while and I then to
Whitehall; walked thither — having at home met withaletter of
Capt. Cooke’s, with which he had sent a boy for me to see, whom
he did intend to recommend to me. I therefore went, and there met
and spoke with him. He gives me great hopes of the boy, which
pleases me; and at Chappell I there met Mr. Blagrave, who gives a
report of the boy; and he showed me him and I spoke to him, and
the boy seems a good willing boy to come to me, and Ihope will do
well.! So I walked homeward and met with Mr. Spong; and he
with me as far as the Old Exchange, talking of many ingenuous
things, Musique, and at last of Glasses, and I find him still the same
ingenuous man that ever he was; and doth, among other fine
things, tell me that by his Microscope of his own making he doth
discover that the wings of a Moth is made just as the feathers of the
wing of a bird, and that most plainly and certainly. While we were
talking, came by several poor creatures, carried by by Constables
1. This was Tom Edwards, who became a favourite servant and married the
Pepyses’ beloved maid Jane Birch.
413
for being at a conventicle. They go like lambs, without any
resistance. I would to God they would either conform, or be more
wise and not be ketched. Thence parted with him, mightily pleased
with his company, and away homeward, calling at Dan Rawlinson
and supped there with my Uncle Wight; and then home and eat
again for form sake with her, and then to prayers and to bed.