1664-05-30

Up, and all the morning at the office. At noon to the Change;
where after business done, Sir W. Rider and Cutler took me to the
Old James and there did give me a good dish of Mackrell, the first I
have seen this year, very good — and good discourse. After dinner
we fell to business about their contract for Tarr, in which and in
another business of Sir W. Rider’s Canvas, wherein I got him to
contract with me, I hold them to some terms, against their Wills, to
the King’s advantage, whichI believe they will take notice of to my
credit.
All the news now is what will become of the Dutch business,
whether war or peace. We all seem to desire it, as thinking ourselfs
to have advantages at present over them; but for my part I dread it.
The Parliament promises to assist the King with lives and fortunes.
381
1664 30 April—3 May
And he receives it with thanks, and promises to demand satisfaction
of the Dutch. My poor Lady Sandwich is fallen sick three days since
of the Mezles. Never more quiet in my family all days of my life
then now, there being only my wife and I and Besse and the little
girl Susan; the best wenches, to our content, that we can ever
expect.
—-&MAY#-
1. Lords day. Lay long in bed. Went not to church, but stayed at
home to examine my last night’s accounts, whichI find right — and
that I am 908/ Creditor in the world — the same I was last month.
Dined; and after dinner — down by water with my wife and Besse
with great pleasure, as low as Greenwich, and so back again,
playing as it were leisurely upon the water to Deptford, where I
landed and sent my wife up higher, to land below Halfway house. I
to the King’s yard and there spoke about several businesses with the
officers; and so with Mr. Wayth, consulting about Canvas, to
Halfway house where my wife was; and after eating there we broke
and walked home before quite dark. So to supper, prayers, and to
bed.
3. Up; and being ready, went by agreement to Mr. Blands and
there drank my morning draught in good Chocolatte, and
slabbering my band sent home for another. And so he and I by
water to Whitehall and walked to St. James, where met Creed and
Vernatty and by and by Sir W. Rider; and so to Mr. Coventry’s
chamber and there upon my Lord Peterburgh’s accounts, where I
endeavoured to show the folly and punish it as much as I could of
Mr. Povy, for of all the men in the world, I never knew any man of
his degree so great a coxcomb in such imployments. I see Ihave lost
him for ever, but I value it not; for he is a coxcomb and I doubt not
over-honest by some things which I see. And yet for all his folly, he
hath the good luck now and then to speak his follies in so good
words and with as good a show as if it were reason and to the
purpose — which is really one of the wonders of my life. In the
evening to my Uncle Wight’s; and not finding them come home,
they being gone to the parke and the Mullbury garden, Iwent to the
Change, and there meeting with Mr. Hempson, whom Sir W.
382
Batten hath lately turned out of his place, merely because of his
coming to me when he came to town before he went to him. And
there he told me many rogueries of Sir W. Batten. How he knows
and is able to prove that Capt. Cox of Chatham did give him tol in
gold to get him to certify for him at the King’s coming in. And that
Tom Newborne did make poor men give him 3/ to get Sir W.
Batten to cause them to be entered in the yard; and that Sir W.
Batten hath oftentimes said — “By God, Tom, you shall get
something and I will have some on’t.” His present Clerke that is
come in Norman’s room hath given him something for his place.
That they live high and (as Sir Frances Clerkes Lady told his wife)
do lack money as well as other people, and have bribes of a piece of
Sattin and cabinetts and other things from people that deal with
him; and that hardly anybody goes to sea or hath anything done by
Sir W. Batten but it comes with a bribe; and that this is publicly true
— that his wife was a whore and that he had Libells flung within his
doors for a cuckold as soon as he was married. That he received rool
in money and in other things, to the value of 50 more of Hempson
and that he entends to give him back but sol. That he hath abused
the Chest and hath now some 1000! by himofit.