1665-01-31

At the office all the morning, and after dinner there again;
despatched first my letters, and then to my accounts, not of the
month but of the whole year also, and was at it till past 12 at night —
it being bitter cold; but yet I was well satisfied with my work and,
above all, to find myself, by the great blessing of God, worth 13491
456
31 December 1664
— by which, as Ihave spent very largely, so Ihave laid up above sool
this year above what I was worth this day twelvemonth. The Lord
make me for ever thankful to his holy name for it. Thence home to
eat a little, and so to bed. As soon as ever the clock struck one, I
kissed my wife in the kitchen by the fireside, wishing her a merry
New year, observing that Ibelieve Iwas the first proper wisher of it
this year, for I did it as soon as ever the clock struck one. So ends the
old year, Ibless God with-great joy to me; not only from my having
made so gooda year of profit, as having spent 4201 and laid up $40!
and upward. But I bless God, Inever have been in so good plight as
to my health in so very cold weather as this is, nor indeed in any hot
weather these ten years, as I am at this day and have been these four
or five months. But am at a great loss to know whether it be my
Hare’s foote,' or taking every morning ofa pill of Turpentine, or
my having left off the wearing of a gowne. My family is my wife, in
good health, and happy with her — her woman Mercer, a pretty
modest quiet maid — her chambermaid Besse— her cook-maid Jane—
the little girle Susan, and my boy which Ihave had about half. year,
Tom Edwards, which I took from the King’s Chappell. And a
pretty and loving quiet family I have as any man in England. My
credit in the world and my office grows daily, and I am in good
esteem with everybody I think. My troubles of my uncles estate
pretty well over. But it comes to be butoflittle profit to us, my
father being much supported by my purse. But great vexations
remain upon my father and me from my Brother Tom’s death and
ill condition, both to our disgrace and discontent — though no great
reason for either. Public matters are all in a hurry about a Duch
warr. Our preparations great. Our provocations against them
great; and after all our presumption, we are now afeared as much of
them as we lately contemned them. Everything else in the State
quiet, blessed be God. My Lord Sandwich at sea with the fleet at
Portsmouth — sending some about to cruise for taking of ships,
which we have done to a great number. This Christmas Ijudged it
fit to look over all my papers and books, and to tear all that I found
either boyish or not to be worth keeping, or fit to be seen ifit should
please God to take me away suddenly.
1. Worn as a charm.
457
oe
gress"s+
tea?
My
~% JANUARY#-
1. Lords day. Lay long in bed, having been busy late last night.
Then up and to my office, where upon ordering my accounts and
papers with respect to my understanding my last year’s gains and
expense. Now this day, I am dividing my expense, to see what my
clothes and every perticular hath stood me in; I mean, all the
branches of my expense. At noon, a good venison pasty and a
turkey to ourselfs, without anybody so much as invited by us — a
thing unusual for so small a family of my condition — but we did it
and were very merry. After dinner to my office again, where very
late alone upon my accounts, but have not brought them to order
yet; and very intricate Ifind it, notwithstanding my care all the year
to keep things in as good method as any man can do. Past 11 a-
clock, home to supper and to bed.
2. Up, and it being a most fine hard frost, I walked a good way
toward Whitehall; and then being overtaken with Sir W. Penn’s
coach, went into it, and with him thither and there did our usual
business with the Duke. Thence, being forced to paya great deal of
money away in boxes (that is. basons at Whitehall), Ito my barbers,
Gervas’s, and there hadalittle opportunity of speaking with my
Jane alone, and did give her something. Thence to the Swan, and
there did sport a good while with Herbert’s young kinswoman
without hurt though, they being abroad, the old people. Then to
the hall, and there agreed with Mrs. Martin, and to her lodgings
which she hath now taken to lie in, in Bowe streete — pitiful poor
things, yet she thinks them pretty; and so they are for her condition
I believe, good enough. Here I did ce que je voudrais avec her most
freely; and ithaving cost me 2s. in wine and cake upon her, I away,
sick of her impudence — and by coach to my Lord Brunkers by
appointment, in the piazza in Covent Guarding — where I
occasioned much mirth with a ballet Ibrought with me, made from
the seamen at sea to their ladies in town — saying Sir W. Penn, Sir G.
458
Ascue, and Sir
J.Lawson made them. Here a most noble French
dinner and banquet, the best Ihave seen these many a day, and good
discourse. Thence to my bookseller’s and at his binders saw Hookes
book of the Microscope, which is so pretty that I presently bespoke
it; and away home to the office, where we met to do something; and
then, though very late, by coach to Sir Ph. Warwickes; but having
company with him, could not speak with him. So back again home,
where, thinking to be merry, was vexed with my wife’s having
looked out a letter in Sir Ph. Sidny about jealousy for me to read,
which she industriously and maliciously caused me to do; and the
truth is, my conscience told me it was most proper for me, and
therefore was touched at it; but took no notice of it, but read it out
most frankly. But it stuck in my stomach; and moreover, I was
vexed to have a dog brought to my house to lime our little bitch,
which they make him do in all their sights; which God forgive me,
doth stir my Jealousy again, though of itself the thing is a very
immodest sight. However, to Cards with my wife a good while,
and then to bed.