1665-09-31

Thus this month ends, with great sadness upon the public
through the greatness of the plague, everywhere through the
Kingdom almost. Every day sadder and sadder news of its encrease.
In the City died this week 7496; and of them 6102 of the plague. But
it is feared that the true number of the dead this week is near 10000 —
partly from the poor that cannot be taken notice of through the
greatness of the number, and partly from the Quakers and others
that will not have any bell ring for them. Our fleet gone out to find
the Dutch, we having about 100 sail in our fleet, and in them, the
Soveraigne one; so that it is a better fleet then the former with the
Duke was. All our fear is that the Dutch should be got in before
them — which would bea very great sorrow to the public, and to me
perticularly, for my Lord Sandwichs sake. A great deal of money
being spent, and the Kingdom not in a condition to spare, nor a
parliament, without much difficulty, to meet to give more. And to
that, to have it said ‘‘What hath been done by our late fleets?” As to
1. For his movements, see above, p. 503, n.
S19
1665 31 August—3 September
myself, [am very well; only, in fear of the plague, and as much of an
Ague, by being forced to go early and late to Woolwich, and my
family to lie there continually. My late gettings have been very
great, to my great content, and am likely to have yet a few more
profitable jobbs ina little while — for which, Tanger and Sir W.
Warren I am wholly obliged to.
-+SEPTEMBER*-
3. Lords day. Up, and put on my colourd silk suit, very fine, and
my new periwigg, bought a good while since, but darst not wear it
because the plague was in Westminster when I bought it. And it is a
wonder what will be the fashion after the plague is done as to
periwigs, for nobody will dare to buy any haire for fear of the
infection — that it had been cut off of the heads of people dead of the
plague. Before church time comes Mr. Hill (Mr. Andrews failing
because he was to receive the sacrament), and to church, where a
sorry dull parson; and so home and most excellent company with
Mr. Hill, and discourse of Musique. I took my Lady Pen home and
her daughter Peg, and merry we were, and after dinner I made my
wife show them her pictures, which did mad pegg Pen who learns
of the same man—and cannot do so well. After dinner left them, and
I by water to Greenwich, where much ado to be suffered to come
into the town because of the sickness, for fear I should come from
London -till I told them who I was. So up to the church, where at
the door I find Capt. Cocke in my Lord Brunkers coach, and he
came out and walked with me in the churchyard till the church was
done. Talking of the ill-government of our Kingdom, nobody
setting to heart the business of the Kingdom, but everybody
minding their perticular profit or pleasures, the King himself
minding nothing but his ease — and so we let things go to wrack.
This arose upon considering what we shall do for money when the
fleet comes in, and more ifthe fleet should not meet with the Dutch,
which will put a disgrace upon the King’s actions, so as the
Parliament and Kingdom will have the less mind to give more
money. Besides, so bad an account of the last money, we fear, will
be given; not half of it being spent, as it ought to be, upon the Navy.
Besides, it is said that at this day our Lord Treasurer cannot tell
what the profits of Chimny money is; what it comes to per annum—
520
nor looks whether that or any other part of the Revenue be duly
gathered as it ought — the very money that should pay the City the
200000! they lent the King being all gathered and in the hands of the
Receiver, and hath been long, and yet not brought up to pay the
City, whereas we are coming to borrow 4 or 500000! more of the
City — which will never be lent as is to be feared. Church being
done, my Lord Brouncker, Sir
J.Mennes, and I up to the Vestry at
the desire of the Justices of the Peace, Sir Th. Bidolph and Sir W.
Boreman and Ald. Hooker — in order to the doing something for
the keeping of the plague from growing; but Lord, to consider the
madness of people of the town, who will (because they are forbid)
come in Crowds along with the dead Corps to see them buried. But
we agreed on some orders for the prevention thereof. Among other
stories, one was very passionate methought — of a complaint
brought against a man in the town for taking a child from London
from an infected house. Ald. Hooker told us it was the child of a
very able citizen in Gracious street, a sadler, who had buried all the
rest of his children of the plague; and himself and wife now being
shut up, and in despairofescaping, did desire only to save the life of
this little child; and so prevailed to have it received stark naked into
the arms of a friend, who brought it (having put it into new fresh
clothes) to Grenwich; where, upon hearing the story, we did agree
it should be permitted to be received and kept in the town. Thence
with my Lord Brouncker to Capt. Cockes, where we mighty
merry, and supped; and very late, I by water to Woolwich, in great
apprehensions of an Ague. Here was my Lord Brouncker’s lady of
pleasure, whoI perceive goes everywhere with him, and he! find is
obliged to carry her and make all the Courtship to her that can be.