1665-02-30

This is solemnly kept asa Fast' all over the City; but Ikept my
house, putting my closett to rights again, having lately put it out of
order in removing my books and things in order to being made
clean. At this all day, and at night to my office, there to do some
business. And being late at it, comes Mercer to me to tell me that
my wife was in bed and desired me to come home, for they hear,
and have night after night lately heard, noises over their head upon
the leads. Now, it is strange to think how, knowing that I have a
great sum of money in my house, this puts me into a most mighty
affright, that for more then two hours I could not almost tell what
to do or say, but feared this and that — and remembered that this
evening I saw a woman and two men stand suspiciously in the
Entry in the dark; I calling to them, they made me only this answer:
the woman said that the men came to see her. But who she was I
could not tell. The truth is, my house is mighty dangerous, having
1. In commemoration of the execution of Charles I.
466
30 January—9 February 1665
so many ways to be come to, and at my windows over the stairs, to
see who goes up and down
— but ifI escape tonight, Iwill remedy it.
God preserve us this night safe. So at almost 2 a-clock, I home to
my house and in great fear to bed, thinking every running of a
mouse really a thief—and so to sleep, very brokenly all night long —
and found all safe in the morning.
~%FEBRUARY*-
4. To my office, and there all the morning. At noon, being
invited, I to the Sun behind the Change to dinner to my Lord
Bellasses — where a great deal of discourse with him — and some
good. Among other at table, he told us a very handsome passage of
the King’s sending him his message about holding out the town of
Newarke, of which he was then governor for the King. This
message he sent in a Slugg bullet, being writ in Cypher and
wrapped up in lead and swallowed. So the messenger came to my
Lord and told him he had a mesage from the King, but it was yet in
his belly; so they did give him some physic, and out it came.
7. Up, and to my office, where busy all the morning. And at
home, at dinner, it being Shrove Tuseday, had some very good
fritters. All the afternoon and evening at the office. And at night
home to supper and to bed. This day Sir W. Batten, who hath been
sick four or five days, is now very bad, so as that people begin to
fear his death — and I at aloss whether it will be better for me to have
him die, because he is a bad man, or live, for fear a worse should
come.
9. Up, and to my office, where all the morning very busy. At
noon home to dinner, and then to my office again — where Sir Wm.
Petty came, among other things, to tell me that Mr. Barlow is dead;
for which, God knows my heart, I could be as sorry as is possible
for one to be for a stranger by whose death he gets 100l per annum!
— he being a very honest man. But after having considered that
when I come to consider the providence of God, by this means
unexpectedly to give me 1ool a year more in my estate, Ihave cause
1. See above, p. 64 (17 July).
467
to bless God, and do it from the bottom of my heart. So home late at
night, after 12 a-clock, and so to bed.