1665-12-22

Up betimes, and to my Lord Brouncker to consider the late
instructions sent us, of the method of our signing bills hereafter and
paying them. By and by, by agreement, comes Sir Jo. Mines and Sir
$62
22 December 1665
W. Batten; and then to read them publicly, and consider of putting
them in execution. About this all the morning. And it appearing
necessary for the Controller to have another clark, I recommend
Poynter to him, which he accepts, and I by that means rid of one
that I fear would not have been fit for my turn — though he writes
very well. At noon comes Mr. Hill to town, and finds me out here
and brings Mr. Houbland, who met him here. So I was compelled
to leave my Lord and his dinner and company, and with them to the
Beare and dined with them and their brothers, of which Hill had
his, and the other two of his — and mighty merry and very fine
company they are, and I glad to see them. After dinner I forced to
take leave of them, by being called upon by Mr. Andrews, Ihaving
sent for him; and by a fine glosse did bring him to desire tallies for
what orders I have to pay him and his company for Tanger
victualls; and I by that means cleared to myself 210/, coming to me
upon their two orders, which is also a noble addition to my late
profits, which have been very considerable of late; but how great, I
know not till I come to cast up my accounts which burdens my
mind that it should be so backward, but I am resolved to settle to
nothing till I have done it. He gone, I to my Lord Brouncker and
there spent the evening, by my desire, in seeing his Lordship open
to pieces and make up again his Wach, thereby being taught what I
never knew before; and it is a thing very well worth my having
seen, and am mightily pleased and satisfied with it. So I sat talking
with him till late at night - somewhat vexed at a snappish answer
Madam Williams did give me to herself, upon my speaking a
free
word to her in mirth, calling her a mad Jade. She answered, we
were not so well acquainted yet. But I was more [vexed] at a letter
from my Lord Duke of Albemarle today, pressing us to continue
our meetings for all Christmas, which, though everybody
entended not to have done, yet Iam concluded in it, who intended
nothing else. But I see it is necessary that I do make often visits to
my Lord Duke, which nothing shall hinder after I have evened my
accounts; and now the River is frozen, I know not how to get to
him. Thence to my lodging, making up my Journall for eight or
nine days; and so my mind being eased of it, I to supper and to bed.
The weather hath been frosty these eight or nine days, and so we
hope for an abatement of the plague the next week; or else God have
mercy upon us, for the plague will certainly continue the next year
if it doth not.
$63