1665-08-08

Up, and to the office, where all the morning we sat. At noon I
home to dinner alone. And after dinner Bagwell’s wife waited at the
door, and went with me to my office, en lequel jo haze todo which I
had a coras6n a hazer con ella. So parted, and I to Sir W. Batten’s
and there sat the most of the afternoon, talking and drinking too
much with my Lord Bruncker, Sir G. Smith, G. Cocke, and others,
very merry. I drunka little, mixed, but yet more then I should do.
So to my officea little, and then to the Duke of Albemarle’s about
some business. The streets mighty empty all the way now, even in
London, which is a sad sight. And to Westminster hall, where
talking, hearing very sad stories from Mrs. Mumford among
others, of Mrs. Michell’s son’s family. And poor Will that used to
sell us ale at the Hall door — his wife and three children dead, all I
think ina day. So home through the City again, wishing Imay have
taken no ill in going; but I will go, I think, no more thither. Late at
the office and then home to supper, having taken a pullet home with
me. And then to bed. The News of De Ruter’s coming home is
certain —and told to the great disadvantage of our fleet and the praise
of De Ruyter; but it cannot be helped —nor do Iknow what to say to
1t.
ti. Up, andall day long finishing and writing over my will twice,
for my father and my wife. Only in the morning a pleasant
rancontre happened, in having a young married woman brought
me by her father, old Delkes, that carries pins alway in his mouth,
to get her husband off, that he should not go to sea. Uno ombre
pouvait avoir done any cosa cum ella, but I did natha sino besar her.
After they were gone, my mind run upon having them called back
again; and I sent a messenger to Blackewall but he failed, so I lost
my expectation. I to the Exchequer about striking newtallies; and I
find the Exchequer, by Proclamacion, removing to Nonesuch.
Back again and at my papers, and putting up my books into chests,
and settling my house and all things in the best and speediest order I
can, lest it should please God to take me away or force me to leave
my house. Late up at it, and weary and full of wind, finding
perfectly that so long as I keep myself in company at meals and do
there eat lustily, which I cannot do alone, having no love to eateing,
but my mind runs upon my business, I am as well as can be; but
$13
when I come to be alone, I do not eat in time, nor enough, nor with
any good heart, and I immediately begin to be full of wind, which
brings me pain, till I come to fill my belly a-days again; then am
presently well.