1665-09-25

Found ourselfs come to the fleet; and so aboard the Prince, and
there, after a good while in discourse, we did agree a bargain of
sooo! with Sir Rog. Cuttance for my Lord Sandwich, for silk,
cinnamon, nutmegs and Indico. And I was near signing to an
undertaking for the payment of the whole sum, but I did by chance
escape it, having since, upon second thoughts, great cause to be
glad of it, reflecting upon the craft and not good condition, it may
be, of Capt. Cocke. I could get no trifles for my wife. Anon to
dinner, and thence in great haste to make a short visit to Sir W. Pen,
where I found them, and his lady and daughter and many
commanders at dinner — among others, Sir G. Askue, of whom,
whatever the matter is, the world is silent altogether. But a very
pretty dinner there was; and after dinner Sir W. Penn made a
bargain with Cocke for ten bales of Silke at 16s. per 1b — which, as
Cocke says, will be a good pennorth. And so away to the Prince, and
presently comes my Lord on board from Greenwich, with whom,
after a little discourse about his trusting of Cocke, we parted and to
our Yacht; but it being calme, we, to make haste, took our Wherry
toward Chatham; but it growing dark, we were put to great
difficultys, our simple yet confident waterman not knowing a step
of the way; and we found ourselfs to go backward and forward,
which, in that dark night and a wild place, did vex us mightily. At
$33
last we got a fisherboy by chance and took him into the boat; and
being an odd kind of boy, did vex us too, for he would not answer
us aloud when we spoke to him; but did carry us safe thither,
though with a mistake or two, but I wonder they were not more. In
our way I was [surprised], and so we were all, at the strange nature
of the Sea water in a dark night; that it seemed like fire upon every
stroke of the Oare —and they say is a sign of Winde. We went to the
Crowne Inne at Rochester, and there to supper and made ourselfs
merry with our poor fisherboy, who told us he had not been in a
bed in the whole seven year since he came to prentice, and hath two
or three year more to serve. After eating something, we in our
clothes to bed.