1665-10-30

Up, and to the office, where busy all the morning; and at noon
with Sir W. Batten to Coll. Cleggat to dinner, being invited —
where a very pretty dinner to my full content, and very merry. The
great burden we have upon us at this time at the office is the
providing for prisoners and sick men that are recovered, they lying
before our office doors all night and all day, poor wretches. Having
been on shore, the Captains won’t receive them on board, and other
ships we have not to put them on, nor money to pay them off or
provide for them. God remove this difficulty. This made us
fallowed all the way to this gentleman’s house, and there are waited
for our coming out after dinner. Thence, mighty merry and much
pleased with the dinner and company, and they with me, I parted;
and there was set upon by the poor wretches, whom I did give
words and some little money to; and the poor people went away
like lambs, and in good earnest are not to be censured if their
necessities drive them to bad Courses of stealing or the like, while
they lack wherewith to live. Thence to the office, and there wrote a
letter or two and despatched a little business; and then to Capt.
Cocke’s, where I find Mr..Temple, the fat blade, Sir Rob. Viner’s
chief man, and we three, and two companions of his, in the evening
by agreement took ship in the Bezan, and the tide carried us no
further then Woolwich, about 8 at night. And so I on shore to my
wife and so to sleep with a good deal of content.
And saving only this night, and a day or two about the same
business about a month or six weeks ago, I do end this month with
the greatest content, and may say that these last three months, for
joy, health and profit, have been much the greatest that ever I
received in all my life in any twelve months almost in my life —
33,5.
1665 30 September—1 October
having nothing upon me but the consideration of the sickliness of
the season during this great plague to mortify mee. For all which,
the Lord God be praised.
~&OCTOBER#-
1. Lords day. Called up about 4of the clock, and so dressed myself;
and so on board the Bezan, and there finding all my company
asleep, Iwould not wake them; but it beginning to be breakofday, I
did stay upon the Decke walking and then into the Maisters Cabbin
and there leaned and slept a little; and so at last was wakened by
Capt. Cockes calling of me, and so I turned out, and then to chat
and talk and laugh, and mighty merry. We spent most of the
morning talking, and reading of The Seige of Rhodes, which is
certainly (the more I read it the more | think so) the best poem that
ever was wrote. We breakfasted betimes and came to the fleet about
2 of the clock in the afternoon, having a fine day and a fine winde.
My Lord received us mighty kindly; and after discourse with us in
general, left us to our business, and he to his officers, having called a
council of Warr. We in the meantime settling of papers with Mr.
Pierce and everybody else, and by and by with Capt. Cuttance.
Anon called down to my Lord, and there with him till supper,
talking and discourse. Among other things, to my great joy he did
assure me that he had wrote to the King and Duke about these prize
goods, and told me that they did approve of what he had done and
that he would own what he had done, and would have me to tell all
the world so; and did under his hand give Cocke and me his
Certificate of our bargains, and giving us full power of disposal of
what we have so bought. This doth ease my mind of all my fear,
and makes my heart lighter by 1toolb then it was before. He did
discourse to us of the Dutch fleet being abroad, 85 of them still, and
are now at the Texell he believes, in expectation of our Eastland
ships coming home with masts and hemp, and -our loaden
Hambrough ships going to Hambrough. He discoursed against
them that would have us yield to no conditions but conquest over
the Dutch, and seems to believe that the Dutch will call for the
protection of the King of France and come under his power — which
were to be wished they might be brought to do under ours, by fair
means; and to that end would have all Dutchmen and families that
536
would come hither and settled, to be declared Denizens. And my
Lord did whisper to me alone, that things here must break in pieces,
nobody minding anything, but every man his own business of
profit or pleasure, and the King some little designs of his own; and
that certainly the Kingdom could not stand in this condition long —
which I fear and believe is very true. So to supper, and there my
Lord the kindest man to me before all the table, talking of me to my
advantage, and with tenderness too, that it overjoyed me. So after
supper Capt. Cocke and I and Temple on board the Bezan, and
there to Cards for a while, and then to read again in Rhodes and so to
sleep. But Lord, the mirth which it caused to me to be waked in the
night by their Snoaring round about me —I did laugh till Iwas ready
to burst, and waked one of the two companions of Temple, who
could not a good while tell where he was, that he heard one laugh
so, till he recollected himself and I told him what it was at; and so to
sleep again, they still Snoaring.