1665-10-15

Lords day. Up, and while stayed for the barber, tried to
compose a duo of Counterpoint; and I think it will do very well, it
being by Mr. Berchensha’s rule. By and by, by appointment comes
Mr. Povy’s coach, and, more then I expected, him himself to fetch
me to Brainford; so he and I immediately set out, having drunk a
draught of Mull’d Sacke, and so rode most nobly in his most pretty
and best-contrived Charriott in the world, with many new
conveniences, his never having, till now in a day or two, not yet
finished — our discourse upon Tanger business — want of money —
and then of public miscarriages — nobody minding the public, but
everybody himself and his lusts. Anon we came to his house and
there I eat a bit, and so with fresh horses, his noble fine horses (the
best confessedly in England, the King having none such), he sent
me to Sir Rob. Viner’s, whom I met coming just from church; and
so after having spent half an hour almost looking upon the horses
with some gentlemen that were in company — he and I into his
garden to discourse of money, but none is to be had — he confessing
542
himself in great straits, and I believe it. Having his answer, and that
I could not get better, we fell to public talk and to think how the
fleet and seamen will be paid; which he protests he doth not think it
possible to compass, as the world is now; no money got by trade,
nor the persons that have it by them in the City to be come at. The
Parliament, it seems, have voted the King 1250000! at s0000l per
month tax for the war — and voted to assist the King against the
Duch and all that shall adhere to them — and thanks to be given him
for his care of the Duke of Yorke — which last is a very popular vote
on the Dukes behalf. He tells me how the taxes of the last
assessment, which should have been in good part gathered, are not
yet laid, and that even in part of the City of London — and that the
Chimny money comes almost to nothing — nor anything else
looked after. Having done this, I parted, my mind not eased by any
money, but only that Ihad done my part to the King’s service. And
so in a very pleasant evening, back to Mr. Povys and there supped.
And after supper to talk and to sing, his man Dutton’s wife singing
very prettily (a mighty fat woman), and I wrote out one song from
her and pricked the Tune, being very pretty. But I did never hear
one sing with so much pleasure to herselfas this lady doth, relishing
it to her very heart — which was mighty pleasant.