1665-06-16

Up, and to the office, where I set hard to business — but was
informed that the Duke of Yorke is come, and hath appointed us to
attend him this afternoon. So after dinner and doing some business
at the office, I to Whitehall, where the Court is full of the Duke and
his Courtiers, returned from sea — all fat and lusty, and ruddy by
being in the sun. Ikissed his hands, and we waited all the afternoon.
By and by saw Mr. Coventry, which rejoiced my very heart. Anon
he and I from all the rest of the company walked into the matted
gallery — where after many expressions of love, we fell to talk of
business. Among other things, how my Lord Sandwich, both in his
counsels and personal service, hath done most honorably and
serviceably. Sir
J.Lawson is come to Greenwich, but his wound in
his knee yet very bad. Jonas Poole in the Vantguard did basely, so as
to be, or will be, turned out of his ship. Capt. Holmes, expecting
upon Sansums death to be made Rere-admirall to the Prince (but
Harman is put in), hath delivered up to the Duke his commission,
which the Duke took and tore. He, it seems, had bid the Prince,
who first told him of Holmes’s intention, that he should dissuade
him from it, for that he was resolved to take it if he offered it. Yet
Holmes would do it, like a rash, proud coxcomb — but he is rich,
and hath it seems sought an occasion of leaving the service. Several
of our Captains have done ill. The great Shipps are the ships do the
497
business, they quite deadening the enemy — they run away upon
sight of the Prince. It is strange, to see how people do already
slight Sir Wm. Berkely, my Lord Fitzharding’s brother, who
three months since was the delight of the Court. Capt. Smith of
the Mary, the Duke talks mightily of, and some great thing will
be done for him. Strange, to hear how the Dutch do relate, as the
Duke says, that they are the conquerors — and bonefires are made
in Dunkirke in their behalf — though a clearer victory can never
be expected. Mr. Coventry thinks they cannot have lost less then
6000 men; and we not dead above 200, and wounded about 400;
in all, about 600. Thence home, and to my office till past 12 and
then home to supper and to bed — my wife and mother not being
yet come, home from W. Hewres chamber, who treats my
mother tonight. Capt. Grove, the Duke told us this day, hath
done the basest thing at Lastoffe, in hearing of the guns and
could not (as others) be got out, but stayed there — for which he
will be tried; and is reckoned a prating coxcombe, and of no
courage.