1665-05-28

Lords day. Went to chapel and hearda little Musique and there
met with Creed, and with hima little while walking and to
Wilkinsons for me to drink, being troubled with Winde; and at
noon to Sir Ph. Warwicke’s to dinner, where abundance of
company came in unexpectedly. And here I saw one pretty piece of
household stuff; as the company encreaseth, to put a larger leaf
upon an Ovall table. After dinner much good discourse with Sir
Phillip, who I find, I think, a most pious good man, and a professor
of a philosiphicall manner of life and principles like Epictetus,
whom he cites in many things. Thence to my Lady Sandwiches,
where to my shame I had not beena great while before. Here, upon
my telling her a story of my Lord of Rochester’s running away on
Friday night last with Mrs. Mallet, the great beauty and fortune of
the [West], who had supped at Whitehall with Mrs. Stewart and
was going home to her lodgings with her grandfather, my Lord
Haly, by coach, and was at Charing cross seized on by both horse-
and foot-men and forcibly taken from him, and put into a coach
with six horses and two women provided to receive her, and carried
away. Upon immediate pursuit, my Lord of Rochester (for whom
the King had spoke to the lady often, but with no success) was taken
at Uxbridge; but the lady is not yet heard of, and the King mighty
angry and the Lord sent to the Tower. Hereupon, my Lady did
confess to me, as a great secret, her being concerned in this story —
for if this match breaks between my Lord Rochester and her, then,
by the consent of all her friends, my Lord Hinchingbrooke stands
fair, and is invited for her. She is worth, and will be at her mother’s
death (who keeps butalittle from her), 25001 per annum. Pray God
give a good success to it. But my poor Lady, who is afeared of the
sickness and resolved to be gone into the country, is forced to stay
in town a day or two or three about it, to see the event of it. Thence
home, and to see my Lady Pen- where my wife and Iwere shown a
fine rarity: of fishes kept in a glass of water, that will live so for ever;
and finely marked they are, being foreign. So to supper at home and
to bed.