1665-08-19

Slept till 8 a-clock; and then up, and met with letters from the
King and Lord Arlington for the removal of our office to
Greenwich. I also wrote letters and made myself ready to go to Sir
G. Carteret at Windsor; and having borrowed a horse of Mr.
Blackbrough, did send him to wait for me at the Duke of
Albemarle’s door — when on a sudden, a letter comes to us from the
Duke of Albemarle, to tell us that the fleet is all come back to
Solebay and are presently to be despatched back again. Whereupon
Ipresently by water to the Duke of Albemarle to know what news —
and there I sawa letter from my Lord Sandwich to the Duke of
Albemarle, and also from Sir W. Coventry and Capt. Teddiman,
how my Lord, having commanded Teddiman with 22 ships (of
which but 15 could get thither, and of those 15 but eight or nine
could come up to play) to go to Bergen,’ where after several
messages to and fro from the Governor of the Castle, urging that
Teddiman ought not to come thither with more then five ships, and
desiring time to think ofit, all the while he suffering the Dutch ships
to land their guns to their best advantage — Teddiman, on the
second present, begun to play at the Dutch ships (whereof ten East
Indiamen) and in three hours’ time (the town and Castle without
any provocation playing on our ships) they did cut all our cables, so
as the wind being off the land, did force us to go out— and rendered
our fireships useless — without doing anything but what hurt, of
course, our guns must have done them. We having lost five
commanders — besides Mr. Edwd. Mountagu and Mr. Windham.
Our fleet is come home, to our great grief with not above five
weeks dry and six days wet provision. However, must out again;
1. In Norway, which was then under the rule of Denmark. Sandwich had been led
to believe that the governor had agreed to connive with him in this attack on the
Dutch E. India fleet which had taken refuge in the harbour.
S17
and the Duke hath ordered the Souveraigne and all other ships ready
to go out to go to the fleet to strengthen them. This news troubles
us all, but cannot be helped. Having read all this news, and received
commands of the Duke with great content, he giving me the words
which to my great joy he hath several times said to me, that his
greatest reliance is upon me — and my Lord Craven also did come
out to talk with me, and told me that Iam in mighty esteem with the
Duke, for which I bless God.