1665-10-11

Up, and so in my chamber stayed all the morning, doing
something toward my Tanger accounts for the stating of them; and
also comes up my landlady, Mrs. Clerke, to make an agreement for
the time to come; and I, for the having room enough, and to keep
out strangers and to have a place to retreat to for my wife if the
sickness should come to Woolwich, am contented to pay dear; so,
for three rooms and a dining-room, and for linen and bread and
beer and butter at nights and mornings, I am to give her s/-ros. per
month — and I wrote, and we signed to an agreement. By and by
comes Cocke, and so he and I (having eat something at his house)
by water to Erith; and there we met Mr. Seamour, one of the
Comissioners for Prizes, and a Parliament Man, and he was mighty
high and had now seized our goods on their behalf — and he mighty
imperiously would have all forfeited and I know not what. It
growing late, and Ihaving something to do at home, took my leave
alone, leaving Cocke there for all night; and so, against tide and in
the dark and very cold weather, to Woolwich, where we had
appointed to keep the night merrily; and so, by Capt. Cockes
coach, had brought a very pretty child (a daughter of one Mrs.
Tookers, next door to my lodging), and so she and a daughter and
$40
kinsman of Mr. Petts made up a fine company at my lodgings at
Woolwich, where my wife and Mercer and Mrs. Barbara danced,
and mighty merry we were, but especially at Mercer’s dancing a
Jigg, which she does the best I ever did see, having the most natural
wayofit and keeps time the most perfectly Iever did see. This night
is kept, in lieu of yesterday, for my wedding-day of Ten Yeares! —
for which God be praised — being now in an extreme good
condition of health and estate and honour, and a way of getting
more money — though at this hour under some discomposure,
rather then dammage, about some prize goods that Ihave bought of
the Fleete in partenership with Capt. Cocke —and for the discourse
about the world concerning my Lord Sandwich, that he hath done a
thing so bad; and indeed it must needs have been a very rash act.
And the rather, because of a parliament now newly met to give
money and will have some account of what hath already been spent
— besides the precedent for a General to take what prizes he pleases —
and the giving a pretence to take away much more then he
entended, and all will lie upon him. And not giving to all the
Commanders, as well as the Flags, he displeases all them — and
offends even some of them, thinking others to be better served then
themselfs. And lastly, puts himself out of a power of begging
anything again a great while of the King. Having danced my people
as long as I saw fit to sit up, I to bed, and left them to do what they
would. I forgot that we had W. Hewer there and Tom — and
Golding, my barber at Greenwich, for our fiddler, to whom I did
give XS.