1665-07-16

Lords day. | up, having lain with Mr. Moore in the Chaplins
chamber. And having trimmed myself, down to Mr. Carteret; and
he being ready, we down and walked in the gallery an hour or two,
it being a most noble and pretty house that ever for the bigness I
saw. Here I taught him what to do; to take the lady alway by the
hand to lead her; and telling him that I would find opportunity to
leave them two together, he should make these and these compli-
ments, and also take a time to do the like to my Lord Crew and Lady
Wright. After I had instructed him, which he thanked me for,
owning that he needed my teaching him, my Lord Crew came
down and family, the young lady among the rest; and so by coaches
to church, four mile off - where a pretty good sermon — and a
declaration of penitence of a man that had undergoné the Church
censure for his wicked life. Thence back again by coach — Mr.
Carteret having not had the confidence to take his lady once by the
hand, coming or going; which I told him of when we came home,
and he will hereafter do it. So to dinner. My Lord excellent
discourse. Then to walk in the gallery and to sit down. By and by
my Lady Wright and I go out (and then my Lord Crew, he not by
504
design); and lastly my Lady Crew came out and left the young
people together. And alittle pretty daughter of my Lady Wright’s
most innocently came out afterward, and shut the door to, as if she
had done it, poor child, by inspiration — which made us without
have good sport to laugh at. They together an hour; and by and by
church time, whither he led her into the coach and into the church;
and so at church all the afternoon. Several handsome ladies at
church — but it was most extraordinary hot that ever I knew it. So
home again and to walk in the gardens, where we left the young
couple a second time; and my Lady Wright and I to walk together,
who to my trouble tells me that my Lady Jem must have something
done to her body by Scott before she can be married, and therefore
care must be had to send him — also, that some more new clothes
must of necessity be made her, which and other things, I took care
of. Anon to supper, and excellent discourse and dispute between
my Lord Crew and the Chaplin, who is a good Scholler but a
nonconformist. Here this evening Ispoke with Mrs. Carter, my old
acquaintance that hath lived with my Lady these twelve or thirteen
years, the sum of all whose discourse, and others for her, is that I
would get her [a] good husband; which I have promised, but know
not when I shall perform. After Mr. Carteret carried to his
chamber, we to prayers again and then to bed.