1665-08-14

Up; and my mind being at mighty ease from the despatch of
my business so much yesterday, I down to Deptford to Sir G.
Carteret; where with him a great while, and a great deal of private
talk concerning my Lord Sandwich’s and his matters ~ and chiefly
of the latter, I giving him great deal of advice about the necessity of
his having caution concerning Fenn, and the many ways there are of
his being abused by any man in his place. And why he should not
bring his son in to look after his business, and more, to be a
Comissioner of the Navy; which he listened to and liked, and told
me how much the King was his good maister, and was sure would
514
not deny him that or anything else greater then that. And Ifind him
a very cunning man, whatever at other times he seems to be. And
among other things, he told me he was not for the Fanfarroons, to
make a show witha great Title, as he might have had long since, but
the main thing to get an estate; and another thing, speaking of
minding of business, ““By God,” says he, “‘I will, and have already
almost brought it to that pass, that the King shall not be able to
whip a cat but Imust be at the tayle of it” — meaning, so necessary he
is, and the King and my Lord Treasurer and all do confess it.
Which, while I mind my business, is my own case in this office of
the Navy; and I hope shall be more, if God give me life and health.
Thence by agreement to Sir
J.Minnes’s lodgings, where I find my
Lord Bruncker; and so by water to the Ferry, and there took Sir W.
Batten’s coach that was sent for us and to Sir W. Battens, where
very merry, good cheer, and up and down the garden, with great
content to me. And after dinner beat Capt. Cocke at Billiards; won
about 8s. of him and my Lord Bruncker. So in the evening, after
much pleasure, back again — and I by water to Woolwich, where
supped with my wife; and then to bed betimes, because of rising
tomorrow at 4 of the clock, in order to the going out with Sir G.
Carteret toward Cranborne to meet my Lord Hinchingbrooke in
his way to Court. This night I did present my wife with the
Dyamond ring a while since given me by Mr. [?Blayton], Dicke
Vines’s brother, for helping him to be a purser — valued at about tol
—the first thing of that nature I did ever give her. Great fears we
have that the plague will be a great Bill this week.