1665-04-27

Up betimes to Mr. Povy’s, and there did sign and seal my
agreement with him about my place of being Treasurer for Tanger
— it being, the greatest part of it, drawn out of a draft of his own
drawing up; only, I have added something here and there in favour
of myself. Thence to the Duke of Albemarle, the first time that we
478
27 March—3 April 1665
officers of the Navy have waited upon him since the Duke of York’s
going, who hath deputed him to be Admirall in his absence. And I
find him a quiet, heavy man, that will help business when he can
and hinder nothing — and am very well pleased with our attendance
on him.
—%APRILL2-
1. With Sir G. Carteret to my Lord Treasurers, and by and by
comes Sir W. Batten and Sir
J.Mennes and anon we come to my
Lord and there did lay open the expense for the six months past,
and an estimate of the seven months to come, to November next —
the first arising to above s00000/; and the latter will, as we judge,
come to above a Million. But to see how my Lord Treasurer did
bless himself, crying he could do no more then he could, nor give
more money then he had, if the occasion and expense were never
so great, which is but a sad story; and then to hear how like a
passionate and ignorant asse Sir G. Carteret did harangue upon the
abuse of Tickets, did make me mad almost, and yet was fain to
hold my tongue. Thence home, vexed mightily to see how simply
our greatest ministers do content themselfs to understand and do
things, while the King’s service in the meantime lies a-bleeding.
At my office late, writing letters, till ready to drop down asleep
with my late sitting up late and running up and down a-days. So
to bed.
2. Lords day. At my office all the morning, renewing my vowes in
writing. And then home to dinner. All the afternoon Mr.
Tasborough, one of Mr. Povy’s clerks, with me about his maister’s
accounts; in the evening Mr. Andrews and Hill sung — but supped
not with me. Then after supper to bed.
3. Up, and to the Duke of Albemarle and Whitehall, where much
business; thence home and to dinner; and then with Creed, my
wife, and Mercer to a play at the Dukes of my Lord Orerey’s, called
Mustapha— which being not good, made Baterton’s part and Ianthes
but ordinary too, so that we were not contented with it at all.
Thence home and to the office a while; and then home to supper and
to bed. All the pleasure of the play was, the King and my Lady
479
Castlemaine was there — and pretty witty Nell’ at the King’s house,
and the younger Marshall, sat next us; which pleased me mightily.