1665-09-10

Lords day. News come to me by an expresse from Mr.
Coventry, telling me the most happy news of my Lord Sandwiches
meeting with part of the Dutch; his taking two of their East India
ships and six or seven others, and very good prize — and that he is in
search of the rest of the fleet, which he hopes to find upon the Well
bancke — with the loss only of the Hector, poor Capt. Cuttle. This
news doth so overjoy me, that I know not what to say enough to
express it; but the better to do it, I did walk to Greenwich: and there
sending away Mr. Andrews, I to Capt. Cocke’s where I find my
Lord Brouncker and his mistress and Sir J. Mennes — where we
supped (there was also Sir W. Doyly and Mr. Eveling); but the
receipt of this news did put us all into such an extasy ofjoy, that it
inspired into Sir
J.Mennes and Mr. Eveling sucha spirit of mirth,
that in all my life I never met with so merry a two hours as our
524
10-14 September | 1665
company this night was. Among other humours, Mr. Eveling’s
repeating of some verses made up of nothing but the various
acceptations of May and Can, and doing it so aptly, upon occasion
of something of that nature, and so fast, did make us all die almost
with laughing, and did so stop the mouth of Sir
J.Mennes in the
middle of all his mirth (and in a thing agreeing with his own manner
of Genius) that I never saw any man so out-done in all my life; and
Sir
J.Mennes’s mirth too, to see himself out-done, was the crown
of all our mirth. In this humour we sat till about 10 at night; and so
my Lord and his mistress home, and we to bed — it being one of the
times of my life wherein I was the fullest of true sense of joy.
13. Up, and walked to Greenwich, taking pleasure to walk with
my minute wach in my hand, by which I am now come to see the
distances of my way from Woolwich to Greenwich. And do find
myself to come within two minutes constantly to the same place at
the end of each quarter of an hour. Here we Rendezvoused at Capt.
Cocke’s and there eat oysters; and so my Lord Brouncker, Sir J.
Mennes and I took the boat; and in my Lord’s coach to Sir W.
Hickes’s, whither by and by my Lady Batten and Sir Wm. comes. It
is a good seat — witha fair grove of trees by it, and the remains of a
good garden. But so let to run to ruine, both house and everything
in and about it — so ill furnished and miserably looked after, I never
did see in all my life. Not so muchas a
latch to his dining-room door
— which saved him nothing, for the wind blowing into the room for
want thereof, flung down a great Bowpott that stood upon the side-
table, and that fell upon some Venice glasses and did him a crown’s
worth of hurt. He did give us the meanest dinner — of beef —
shoulder and umbles of venison which he takes away from the
keeper of the Forest — and a few pigeons; and all in the meanest
manner that ever I did see — to the basest degree. After dinner we
officers of the Navy stepped aside to read some letters and consider
some business, and so in again. I was only pleased at a very fine
picture of the Queene Mother
— when she was young, by Van Dike;
a very good picture and a lovely sweet face.
14. Up, and walked to Greenwich and there fitted myself in
several businesses to go to London, where I have not been now a
pretty while. But before I went from the office, news is brought by
word of mouth that letters are now just now brought from the
Fleete of our taking a great many more of the Dutch fleet —in which
$25
1665 14 September
I did never more plainly see my command of my temper, in my not
admitting myself to receive any kind ofjoy from it till I had heard
the certainty of it. And therefore went by water directly to the Duke
of Albemarle, where I find a letter of the 12th from Soldbay, from
my Lord Sandwich, of the fleet’s meeting with about 18 more of the
Dutch fleet and his taking of most of them; and the messenger says
they had taken three after the letter was wrote and sealed; which
being 21, and the 14 took the other day, is [35] sail— some of which
are good, and others rich ships — which is so great a cause ofjoy in us
all, that my Lord and everybody is highly joyed thereat. And
having taken a copy of my Lord’s letter, I away back again to the
Bear at the Bridge foot, being full of wind and out of order, and
there called for a biscuit and a piece of cheese and gill of sack
— being
forced to walk over the Bridge toward the Change, and the plague
being all thereabouts. Here my news was highly welcome, and I did
wonder to see the Change so full, I believe 200 people; but not a
man or merchant of any fashion, but plain men all. And Lord, to see
how I did endeavour all I could to talk with as few as I could, there
being now no observation of shutting up of houses infected, that to
be sure we do converse and meet with people that have the plague
upon them. I to Sir Rob. Viners, where my main business was
about settling the business of Debusty’s 5000! tallies — which I did
for the present to enable me to have some money. And so home,
buying some things for my wife in the way. So home and put up
several things to carry to Woolwich — and upon serious thoughts, I
am advised by W. Griffin to let my money and plate rest there, as
being as safe as any place, nobody imagining that people would
leave money in their houses now, when all their families are gone.
So for the present, that being my opinion, I did leave them there
still. But Lord, to see the trouble that it puts a man to to keep safe
what with pain a man hath been getting together; and there is good
reason for it. Down to the office, and there wrote letters to and
again about this good news of our victory, and so by water home
late —
Where when I came home, I spent some thoughts upon the
occurrences of this day, giving matter for as much content on one
hand and melancholy on another as any day in all my life — for the
first, the finding of my money and plate and all safe at London, and
speeding in my business of money this day — the hearing of this
good news, to such excess after so great a despair of my Lord’s
doing anything this year — adding to that, the decrease of 500 and
526
10. Charles 1 on the eve of the Restoration. Attributed to Simon Luttichuys.
11. Barbara Villiers, Countess of Castlemaine, painted in the studio of Sir Peter
Lely, c.1664
, by Simon Verelst, c.16
13. George Monck, 1st Duke of Albemarle, by Sir Peter Lely
more, which is the first decrease we have yet had in the sickness
since it begun —and great hopes that the next week it will be greater.
Then on the other side— my finding that though the Bill in general is
abated, yet the City within the walls is encreased and likely to
continue so, and is close to our house there — my meeting dead
corps’s of the plague, carried to be buried close to me at noonday
through the City in Fanchurch street — to see a person sick of the
sores carried close by me by Grace church in a hackney-coach — my
finding the Angell tavern at the lower end of Tower hill shut up;
and more then that, the alehouse at the Tower stairs; and more then
that, that the person was then dying of the plague when I was last
there, a little while ago at night, to write a short letter there, and I
overheard the mistress of the house sadly saying to her husband
somebody was very ill, but did not think it was of the plague — to
hear that poor Payne my water[man] hath buried a child and is
dying himself — to hear that a labourer I sent but the other day to
Dagenhams to know how they did there is dead of the plague; and
that one of my own watermen, that carried me daily, fell sick as
soon as he had landed me on Friday morning last, when I had been
all night upon the water (andI believed he did get his infection that
day at Brainford) is now dead of the plague — to hear that Capt.
Lambert and Cuttle are killed in the taking these ships and that Mr.
Sidny Mountague is sick of a desperate fever at my Lady Carteret’s
at Scott’s hall—to hear that Mr. Lewes hath another daughter sick —
and lastly, that both my servants, W. Hewers and Tom Edwards,
have lost their fathers, both in St. Sepulcher’s parish, of the plague
this week — doth put me into great apprehensions of melancholy,
and with good reason. ButI put off the thoughts of sadness as much
as I can; and the rather to keep my wife in good heart, and family
also. After supper (having eat nothing all day) upon a fine Tench of
Mr. Sheldens taking, we to bed.