1665-10-02

We having sailed all night (and I do wonder how they in the
dark could find the way), we got by morning to Gillingham; and
thence all walked to Chatham, and there with Comissioner Pett
viewed the Yard; and among other things, a Teame of four horses
came close by us, he being with me, drawinga piece of timber that I
am confident one man would easily have carried upon his back; I
made the horses be taken away and a man or two take the timber
away with their hands. This the Comissioner did see, but said
nothing; but I think had cause to be ashamed of. We walked, he and
I and Cocke, to the Hill house, where we find Sir Wm. Pen in bed,
and there much talk and much dissembling of kindness from him;
but he is a false rogue and I shall not trust him. But my being there
did procure his consent to have his silk carried away before the
money received, which he would not have done for Cocke I am
sure. Thence to Rochester; walked to the Crowne, and while dinner
was getting ready, I did there walk to visit the old Castle ruines,
which hath been a noble place; and there going up, I did upon the
stairs overtake three pretty maids or women and took them up with
me, and] did besarlas muchas vezes et tocar leur mains and necks, to
my great pleasure: but Lord, to see what a dreadful thing it is to look
down precipices, for it did fright me mightily and hinder me of
much pleasure which I would have made to myself in the company
of these three if it had not been for that. The place hath been very
noble, and great and strong in former ages. So to walk up and down
$37
the Cathedrall, and thence to the Crowne, whither Mr. Fowler, the
Mayor of the towne, was come in his gowne, and is a very
Reverend Magistrate. After I had eat a bit, not staying to eat with
them, I went away; and so took horses and to Gravesend, and there
stayed not, but got a boat (the sickness being very much in the
Towne still) and so called on board my Lord Bruncker andSirJo.
Minnes, on board one of the East Indiamen at Erith, and there do
find them full of envious complaints for the pillageing of the ships.
But I did pacify them and discoursed about making money of some
of the goods, and do hope to be the better by it honestly. So took
leave (Madam Williams being here also with my Lord) and about 8
a-clock got to Woolwich; and there supped and mighty pleasant
with my wife, who is, for aught I
see, all friends with her maids; and
so in great joy and content to bed.