1665-09-07

Up by 5 of the clock, mighty full of fear of an Ague, but was
obliged to go; and so by water, wrapping myself up warm, to the
Tower; and there sent for the Weekely Bill and find 8252 dead in all,
and of them, 6978 of the plague — which is a most dreadfull Number
— and shows reason to fear that the plague hath got that hold that it
will yet continue among us. Thence to Brainford, reading The
Villaine (a pretty good play) all.the way. There a coach of Mr.
Povy’s stood ready for me, and he at his house ready to come in; and
so we together merrily to Swakely, Sir R. Viner’s —a very pleasant
place, bought by him ofSirJames Harringtons lady. He took us up
and down with great respect and showed us all his house and
grounds; and is a place not very moderne in the gardens nor house,
but the most uniforme in all that ever I saw — and some things to
excess. Pretty to see over the Screene of the Hall (put up bySir J.
Harrington, a Long Parliament-man) the King’s head, and my Lord
of Essex on one side and Fairfax on the other — and upon the other
side of the Screene, the parson of the parish and the lord of the
manor and his sisters. The window-cases, door-cases, and Chim-
nys of all the house are Marble. He showed meablack boy that he
had that died of a consumption; and being dead, he caused him to be
dried in a Oven, and lies there entire in a box. By and by to dinner,
where his lady I find yet handsome, but hath been a very handsome
woman — now is old — hath brought him near 1oo0000!. And now he
§22
lives no man in England in greater plenty, and commands both
King and Council with his Creditt he gives them. Here was a fine
lady, a merchant’s wife, at dinner with us; and who should be here
in the quality of a Woman but Mrs. Worships daughter, Dr.
Clerke’s niece. And after dinner Sir Rob. led us up to his long
gallery, very fine, above stairs (and better or such furniture I never
did see), and there Mrs. Worship did give us three or four very good
songs, and sings very neatly —to my great delight. After all this, and
ending the chief business to my content, about getting a promise of
some money of him — we took leave, being exceeding well treated
here. And a most pleasant Journy we had back, Povy and J; his
company most excellent in anything but business — he here giving
me an account of as many persons at Court as I had a mind or
thought of enquiring after. He tells me, by a letter he showed me,
that the King is nor hath been of late very well, but quite out of
humour and, as some think, in a consumption and weary of
everything. He showed me my Lord Arlingtons house that he was
born in, ina Towne called Harlington. And so carried me through a
most pleasant country to Brainford, and there put me into my boat
and good-night. So I wrapped myself warm, and by water got to
Woolwich about one in the morning. My wife and all in bed.