1665-06-08

About 5 a-clock my wife came home, it having lightened all
night hard, and one great shower of rain. She came and lay upon the
bed. I up, and to the office, where all the morning. I alone at home
to dinner, my wife, mother, and Mercer dining at W. Joyces, I
giving her a caution to go round by the Half Moone to his house,
because of the plague. Ito my Lord Treasurer’s, by appointment of
Sir Tho. Ingram’s, to meet the goldsmiths — where I met with the
great news, at last newly come, brought by Bab May from the
Duke of Yorke, that we have totally routed the Dutch.! That the
Duke himself, the Prince, my Lord Sandwich, and Mr. Coventry
are all well. Which did put me into sucha
joy, that I forgot almost
all other thoughts. The sum of the news is:
Victory over the Dutch. June. 3. 1665.
This day they engaged — the Dutch neglecting’ greatly the
opportunity of the wind they had of us — by which they lost the
benefit of their fireships. The Earl of Falmouth, Muskery, and Mr.
Rd. Boyle killed on board the Dukes ship, the Royall Charles, with
one shot. Their blood and brains flying in the Duke’s face — and the
1. At the Battle of Lowestoft.
494
ev iro tase key: Sandwich.
. Edward Mountagu, Ist Earl of Sandwich, by Sir Peter Lely, c.1659—-60
4. James, Duke of York, by Samuel Cooper, ?c.1660
5. Sir George Carteret, . Sir William Coventry,
by Sir Peter Lely, ?c.1660 by John Riley
7. Sir William Penn, 8. Sir John Mennes,
by Sir Peter Lely painted in the studio of
Sir Anthony van Dyck,
c.1640
(early nineteenth-
century copy)
William Hewer, by Sir Godfrey Kneller, c.1686 -
head of Mr. Boyle striking down the Duke, as some say. Earle of
Marlbrough, Portland, Rere-[A]dm. Sansum (to Prince Rupert)
killed, and Capt. Kirby and Ableson. Sir Jo. Lawson wounded on
the knee — hath had some bones taken out, and is likely to be well
again. Upon receiving the hurt, he sent to the Duke for another to
command the Royall Oake. The Duke sent Jordan out of the St.
George, who did brave things in her. Capt. Jer. Smith of the Mary
was second to the Duke, and stepped between him and Capt.
Seaton of the Urania (76 guns and 400 men), who had sworn to
board the Duke. Killed him, 200 men, and took the ship. Himself
losing 99 men, and never an officer saved but himself and
Lieutenant. His maister endeed is saved, with his leg cut off. Adm.
Opdam blown up. Trump killed, and said by Holmes. All the rest
of their Admiralls, as they say, but Everson (whom they dare not
trust for his affection to the prince of Orange) are killed. We have
taken and sunk, as is believed, about 24 of their best ships. Killed
and taken near 8 or 10000 men; and lost, we think, not above 700. A
great victory, never known in the world. They are all fled; some 43
got into the Texell and others elsewhere, and we in pursuit of the
rest.
Thence, with my heart full ofJoy, home, and to my officea
little;
then to my Lady Pen’s, where they are all joyed and not a little
puffed up at the good success of their father; and good service
endeed is said to have been done by him. Had a great bonefire at the
- gate; and I with my Lady Pens people and others to Mrs. Turner’s
great room, and then down into the street. I did give the boys 4s.
among them —and mighty merry; so home to bed — with my heart
at great rest and quiet, saving that the consideration of the victory is
too great for me presently to comprehend.