1665-09-18

By break of day we came to within sight of the fleet, which
was a very fine thing to behold, being above 100 ships, great and
small — with the flag-ships of each squadron distinguished by their
several flags on their main, fore, or mizzen masts. Among others,
the Soveraigne, Charles, and Prince, in the last of which my Lord
Sandwich was. When we called by her side, his Lordship was not
stirring; so we came to anchor alittle below his ship, thinking to
-have rowed on board him; but the wind and tide was so strong
against us that we could not get up to him; no, though rowed by a
boat of the Prince’s that came to us to tow us up; at last, however, he
brought us within a
little way, and then they flung out a rope to us
from the Prince, and so came on board, but with great trouble and
time and patience, it being very cold. We find my Lord newly up in
his nightgown, very well. He received us kindly, telling us the state
of the fleet; lacking provisions, having no beer at all, nor have had
most of them these three weeks or month, and but few days’ dry
provisions. And endeed, he tells us that he believes no fleet was ever
set to sea in so ill condition of provision as this was when it went out
last. By and by was called a council of warr on board, when came
Sir W. Pen there — and Sir Chr. Mings, Sir Edwd. Spragg, SirJos.
Jordan, Sir Tho. Teddiman, and Sir Rogr. Cuttance. And so the
necessities of the fleet for victuals, clothes, and money was
discoursed, but by the discourse there of all but my Lord — that is to
say, the counterfeit grave nonsense of Sir W. Pen and the poor mean
$29
1665 18 September
discourse of the rest, methinks I see how the government and
management of the greatest business of the three nations is
committed to very ordinary heads, saving my Lord; and in effect,
is only upon him, who is able to do what he please with them,
they not having the meanest degree of reason to be able to oppose
anything that he says. And so] fear it is ordered but like all the rest
of the King’s public affayres. The council being up, they most of
them went away, only Sir W. Penn, who stayed to dine there, and
did so; but the wind being high, the ship (though the motion of it
was hardly discernible to the eye) did make me sick, so as I could
not eat anything almost. After dinner Cocke did pray me to help
him to soo! of W. How, who is Deputy-Treasurer, wherein my
Lord Bruncker and I am to be concerned; and I did ask it my Lord,
and he did consent to have us furnished with sool, and I did get it
paid to Sir Roger Cuttance and Mr. Pierce in part for above 1000/-
worth of goods, Mace, Nuttmeggs, Cynamon, and Cloves. And
he tells us we may hope to get sool by it —- which God send. Great
spoil, I hear, there hath been of the two East India ships, and that
yet they will come in to the King very rich — so that I hope this
journy will be worth rool to me.' After having paid this money,
we took leave of my Lord, and so to our Yacht again, having seen
many of my friends there. Among others, I hear that W. Howe
will grow very rich by this last business and grows very proud and
insolent by it — but it is what I ever expected. I hear by everybody
how much my poor Lord of Sandwich was concerned for me
during my silence awhile, lest I had been dead of the plague in this
sickly time.
No sooner come into the Yacht, though overjoyed with the good
work we have done today, but Iwas overcome with seasickness, so
that I begun to spew soundly — and so continued a good while -till
at last I went into the Cabbin, and shutting my eys, my trouble did
cease, that I fell asleep; which continued till we came into Chatham
River, where the water was smooth, and then I rose and was very
well. And the tide coming to be against us, we did land before we
came to Chatham and walked a mile — having very good discourse
by the way —it being dark and it beginning to rain just as we got
1. Two Dutch E. Indiamen (the Phoenix and the Slot van Honingen) had been
captured by Sandwich. Most imprudently he had allowed his officers and seamen
to take some of the goods before they were judged to be prize in the prize court. He
cameunderheavy criticism andin December 1665 wassentoffto Spainas ambassador
in consequence. Pepys very wisely soon sold the goods he now purchased.
$30
thither. At Comissioner Petts we did eat and drink very well, and
very merry we were. And about 10 at night, it being moonshine
and very cold, we set out, his coach carrying us, and so all night
travelled to Greenwich — we sometimes sleeping a little, and then
talking and laughing by the way; and with much pleasure, but that
it was very horrible cold, that I was afeared of an ague. A pretty
passage was that the coach stood of
a sudden, and the coachman
came down, and the horses stirring, he cried “Hold!” which waked
me; and the coach|man] standing at the boot to [do] something or
other, and crying ‘“‘Hold!”’, I did wake of a sudden; and not
knowing who he was nor thinking of the coachman, between
sleeping and waking I did take up the heart to take him by the
shoulder, thinking verily he had been a thief. But when I waked, I
found my cowardly heart to discover a fear within me, and that I
should never have done it if I had been awake.