1665-10-07

Up, and to the office along with Mr. Childe, whom I sent for to
discourse about the victualling business; who will not come into
partenership (no more will Capt. Beckford) but I do find him a
mighty understanding man, and one | will keep a knowledge of.
Did business, though not much, at the office, because of the
horrible Crowd and lamentable moan of the poor seamen that lie
starving in the streets for lack of money — which doth trouble and
perplex me to the heart. And more at noon, when we were to go
through them; for then a whole hundred of them fallowed us —
some cursing, some swearing, and some praying to us. And that
that made me more troubled, was a letter come this noon from the
Duke of Albemarle, signifying the Duch to be in sight, with 80
sail, yesterday morning off of Soldbay, coming right into the bay;
God knows what they will and may do to us, we having no force
abroad able to oppose them, but to be sacrifized to them. Here came
Sir Wm. Rider to me, whom I sent for about the victualling
business also; but he neither will not come into partenership, but
desires to be of the Commission, if there be one. Thence back the
back way to my office, where very late, very busy — but most of all
when at night comes two waggons from Rochester with more
goods from Capt. Cocke; and in housing them at Mr. Tookers
lodgings, comes two of the Custome house to seize them, and did
seize them, but I showed them my Transire. However, after some
heat and angry words, we locked them up, and sealed up the key
and did give it to the constable to keep till Monday — and so parted.
But Lord, to think how the poor constable came to me in the dark,
going home: “Sir,” says he, “I have the Key, and ifyou would have
me do any service for you, send for me betimes tomorrow morning
and I will do what you would have me.”’ Whether the fellow doth
this out of kindness or knavery, I cannot tell, but it is pretty to
observe. Talking with him in the highway, comes close by the
bearers with a dead corps of the plague; but Lord, to see what
custom is, that Iam come almost to think nothing of it. So to my
lodging, and there with Mr. Hater and Will ending a busines of the
539
state of the last six months’ charge of the Navy, which we bring to
1000000! and above — I think we do not enlarge much in it, if
anything. So to bed.