1665-11-15

Up, and all the morning at the office busy; and at noon to the
Kings head Taverne, where all the Trinity house dined today to
choose a new Maister in the room of Hurlestone that is dead. And
Capt. Crispe is chosen. But Lord, to see how Sir W. Batten governs
all and tramples upon Hurlstone; but I am confident that company
will grow the worse for that man’s death, for now Batten, and in
him a lazy, corrupt, doting rogue, will have all the sway there.
After dinner, who comes in but my Lady Batten and a troop of a
dozen women almost; and expected, as I found afterward, to be
made mighty much of, but nobody minded them. But thebest Jest
was, that when they saw themselfs not regarded, they would go
away; and it was horrible foul weather, and my Lady Batten
walking through the dirty lane with new spick-and-span white
shoes, she dropped one of her Galloshes in the dirt, where it stuck,
and she forced to go home without one — at which she was horrible
vexed, and I led her. And after vexing heralittle more in mirth, I
parted, and to Glanvills, where I knew Sir Jo. Robinson, Sir G.
Smith and Capt. Cocke were gone. And there, with the company
of Mrs. Penington (whose father I hear was one of the Court of
Justice, and died prisoner, of the stone, in the Towre), I made them
against their resolutions to stay from hour to hour till it was almost
midnight, and a furious dark and rainy and windy stormy night;
and which was best, I, with drinking small beer, made them all
drunk drinking wine, at which Sir Jo. Robinson made great sport.
But they being gone, the lady andI very civilly sat an hour by the
fireside observing the Folly of this Robinson, that makes it his work
to praise himself and all he says and doth — like a heavy-headed
coxcomb. The plague, blessed be God, is decreased near 400;
making the whole this week but 1300 and odd — for which the Lord
be praised.
$54
16-17. Up, and fitted myself for my Journy down to the Fleete;
and sending my money and boy down by water to Eriffe, |
borrowed a horse of Mr. Boreman’s son, and after having sat an
hour laughing with my Lady Batten and Mrs. Turner and eat and
drank with them, I took horse and rode to Eriffe; where after
making a little visit to Madam Williams, who did give me
information of W. Hows having bought eight bags of precious
stones, taken from about the Dutch Viceadmirall’s neck, of which
there were eight Dyamonds, which cost him 4000! sterling in India
and hoped to have made 12000! here for them — and that this is told
by one that sold him one of the bags, which hath nothing but rubys
init, which he hath for 35s. —and that it will be proved he hath made
1251 of one stone that he bought. This she desired, and I resolved, I
would give my Lord Sandwich notice of. So I on board my Lord
Bruncker, and there he and Sir Edmd. Pooly carried me down into
the Hold of the India Shipp, and there did show me the greatest
wealth lie in confusion that a man can see in the world — pepper
scatter[ed] through every chink, you trod upon it; and in cloves and
nutmegs, I walked above the knees — whole rooms full —and silk in
bales, and boxes of Copperplate, one of which I saw opened.
Having seen this, which was as noblea sight as ever Isaw in my life,
laway on board the other ship in despair, to get the pleasure-boat of
the gentlemen there to carry me to the fleet. They came, Mr.
Ashburnham and Coll. Wyndham — but pleading the King’s
business, they did presently agree I should have it. So Ipresently on
board and got under sail, and had a good bedd by the shift of
Wyndhams; and so sailed all night and got down to Quinbrough
water, where all the great ships are now come; and there on board
my Lord, and was soon received with great content. And after
some little discourse, he and I on board Sir W. Pen and there held a
council of Warr about many wants of the fleet, but chiefly how to
get Slopps and victuals for the fleet now going out to convoy our
Hambrough Ships, that have been so long detained, for four or five
months, for want of Convoy; which we did accomodate one way
or other, and so after much chatt, Sir W. Penn did give us a very
good and neat dinner, neater I think then ever I did see at his own
house at home in my life, and so was the other I eat with him. After
dinner, much talk; and among other things, he and I about his
money for his prize goods, wherein I did give him a cool answer but
so as we did not disagree in words much; and so let that fall, and so
fallowed my Lord Sandwich, who was gone a
little before me on
S55
1665 a 17—22 November
board the Royall James. And there spent an hour, my Lord playing
upon the Gittarr, which he now commends above all Musique in
the world, because it is bass enough for a single voice, and is so
portable, and manageable without much trouble. As an infinite
secret, my Lord tells me the factions are high between the King and
the Duke, and all the Court are in an uproare with their loose
amours — the Duke of York being in love desperately with Mrs.
Stewart. Nay, that the Duchesse herself is fallen in love with her
new Maister of the Horse, one Harry Sidny, and another Harry
Savill — so that God knows what will be the end of it. And that the
Duke is not so obsequious as he used to be, but very high of late —
and would be glad to be in the head of.an army as generall; and that
it is said that he doth propose to go and command under the King of
Spayne in Flanders. That his amours to Mrs. Stewart are told the
King — so that all is like to be nought among them. After he had
given thanks to me for my kind visit and good counsel, on which he
seems to set much by, Ileft him; and so away to my Bezan againe —
and there to read in a pretty French book, La Nouvelle Allegorique,
upon the strife between Rhetorique and its enemies — very pleasant.
So after supper to sleep; and sailed all night, and came to Erith
before break of day.
18. About 9 of the clock I went on shore there (calling by the way
only to look upon my Lord Brouncker), and so hired an ill-
favoured hoss and away to Greenwich to my lodgings, where Ihear
how rude the Souldiers have been in my absence, swearing what
they would do with me — which troubled me; but however, after
eating a bit, I to the office and there very late writing letters, and so
home and to bed.
21. Up, and to the office, where all the morning doing business.
And at noon home to dinner, and quickly back again to the office,
where very busy all the evening; and late, sent a long discourse to
Mr. Coventry by his desire, about the regulateing of the method of
our payment of bills in the Navy — which will be very goed; though
it may be he did ayme principally at striking at Sir G. Carteret. So,
weary, but pleased with this business being over, I home to supper
and to bed.
22. Up, and by water to the Duke of Albemarle and there did
some little business — but most to show myself, and mightily Iam
556
yet in his and Lord Cravens books; and thence to the Swan and there
drank, and so down to the bridge, and so to the Change, where
spoke with many people and abouta great deal of business, which
kept me late. I heard this day that Mr. Harrington is not dead of the
plague as we believed; at which I was very glad — but most of all to
hear that the plague is come very low; that is, the whole under 1000
and the plague 600 and odd — and great hopes of a further decrease,
because of this day’s being a very exceeding hard frost — and
continues freezing. This day the first of the Oxford Gazettes came
out, which is very pretty, full of news, and no folly in it — wrote by
Williamson. From the Change, which is pretty full again, I to my
house and there took some things, and so by water to my lodging at
Greenwich and dined; and then to the office a while and at night
home to my lodgings, and took T. Willson and T. Hater with me
and there spent the evening till midnight, discoursing and settling
of our Victualling business, that thereby I might draw up
instructions for the Surveyours, and that we might be doing
something to earne our money. This done, I late to bed. Among
other things, it pleased me to have it demonstrated that a purser
without professed cheating is a professed loser, twice as much as he
gets.