1665-07-15

Up, and after all business done at the office, though late, I to
Deptford. But before I went out of the office, saw there young
Bagwells wife returned; but could not stay to speak to her, though I
had a great mind to it. And also another great lady, as to fine
clothes, did attend there to have a ticket signed; which I did do,
taking her through the garden to my office, where I signed it and
had a salute of her; and so I away by boat to Redriffe, and thence
walked; and after dinner, at Sir G. Carteret, where they stayed till
almost 3 a-clock for me; and anon took boat, Mr. Carteret and I, to
the ferry-place at Greenwich and there stayed an hour, after
crossing the water to and again to get our coach and horses over,
and by and by set out and so toward Dagenham. But Lord, what
silly discourse we had by the way as to matter of love-matters, he
1. The Carterets were staying at the Navy Treasurer’s official house at Deptford.
Because of the Plague, Elizabeth Pepys had been staying since 5 July at Woolwich
at the house of the Clerk of the Cheque, William Sheldon. EPpy joined her there
occasionally during the next few Goth but continued to base himself on Seething
Lane. In mid-August the Navy Board moved to rooms in the royal palace at
Greenwich, and at the end of the month Pepys found it convenient to settle at
Woolwich. He had to spend occasional nights in lodgings at Greenwich, however,
and by 11 October had established himself there at Mrs Clarke’s. On 7 January
1666 he moved back to London where the Navy Board resumed its meetings on
the 9th. Elizabeth had returned to Seething Lane on 2 December.
$03
being the most awkerd man J ever I met withal in my life as to that
business. Thither we came by time to begin to be dark, and were
kindly received by my Lady Wright and my Lord Crew; and to
discourse they went, my Lord discoursing with him, asking of him
questions of Travell, which he answered well enough in a few
words. But nothing to the lady from him at all. To supper, and after
supper to talk again, he yet taking no notice of the lady. My Lord
would have had me have consented to leaving the young people
together tonight to begin their amours, his staying being but to be
little. But I advised against it, lest the lady might be too much
surprized. So they led him up to his chamber, whereI stayeda
little
to know how he liked the lady; which he told me he did mightily,
but Lord, in the dullest insipid manner that ever lover did. So I bid
him good-night, and down to prayers with my Lord Crew’s
family. And after prayers, my Lord and Lady Wright and I to
consult what to do; and it was agreed at last to have them go to
church together as the family used to do, though his lameness was a
great objection against it; but at last my Lady Jem sent me word by
my Lady Wright that it would be better to do just as they used to do
before his coming, and therefore she desired to go to church —
which was yielded then to.