1665-01-15

Lords day. Up; and aftera
little at my office to prepare a fresh
draft of my vows for the next year, I to church, where a most
insipid young coxcomb preached. Then home to dinner; and after
dinner to read in Rusworths Collections about the charge against the
late Duke of Buckingham, in order to the fitting me to speak and
understand the discourse anon before the King, about the suffering
the Turkey merchants to send out their fleet at this dangerous time,
when we can neither spare them ships to go, nor men nor King’s
ships to convoy them. At 4 a-clock with Sir W. Penn in his coach to
my Lord Chancellors, where by and by Mr. Coventry, Sir W.
Penn, Sir
J.Lawson, Sir G. Ascue, and myself were called in to the
King, there being several of the Privy Council, and my Lord
Chancellor lying at length upon a couch (of the goute I suppose);
and there Sir W. Penn begun, and he had prepared heads in a paper
and spoke pretty well to purpose, but with so much leisure and
461
1665 15 January
gravity as was tiresome — besides, the things he said was but very
poor to a man in his trade after a great consideration. But it was to
purpose endeed, to dissuade the King from letting these Turkey
ships to go out — saying (in short), the King having resolved to have
130 ships out by the spring, he must have above 20 of them
merchantmen-— towards which, he in the whole river could find but
12 or 14; and of them, the five ships taken up by these merchants
were a part, and so could not be spared. That we should need 30000
to man these 130 ships; and of them in service we have not above
16000, so we shall need 14000 more. That these ships will with their
convoys carry above 2000 men, and those the best men that could
be got, it being the men used to the southward that are the best men
for war, though those bred in the north among the Colliers are
good for labour. That it will not be safe for the merchants, nor
honourable for the King, to expose these rich ships with his convoy
of six ships to go, it not being enough to secure them against the
Dutch, who without doubt will have a great fleet in the Straights.
This, Sir
J.Lawson enlarged upon. Sir G. Ascu, he chiefly spoke
that the warr and trade could not be supported together — and
therefore, that trade must stand still to give way to that. This Mr.
Coventry seconded, and showed how the medium of the men the
King hath, one year with another, imployed in his Navy since his
coming, hath not been above 3000 men, or at most 4000 men; and
now having occasion of 30000, the remaining 26000 must be found
out of the trade of the nation. He showed how the Cloaths sending
by these merchants to Turkey are already bought and paid for to the
workmen, and are as many as they would send these twelve months
or more; so the poor do not suffer by their not going, but only the
merchant, upon whose hands they lie dead — and so the incon-
venience is the less. All ended with a conviction (unless future
discourse with the merchants should alter it) that it was not fit for
them to go out, though the ships be loaded. Staying without, my
Lord Fitzharding came thither and fell to discourse of Prince
Rupert, and made nothing to say that his disease was the pox and
that he must be Fluxed, telling the horrible degree’ of the disease
upon him, with its breaking out on his head. But above all, I
observed how he observed from the Prince that Courage is not
what men take it to be, a contempt ofdeath; “For,” says he, “Show
Chagrin the Prince was the other day when he thought he should
die — having no more mind to it then another man; but,” says he,
“some men are more apt to think they shall escape then another
462
. Samuel Pepys, by John Hayls, 1666. He holds the manuscript ofhis song,
?
Beauty Retir
2. Elizabeth Pepys, from an engraving by James Thomson after the portrait by
John Hayls, 1666
man in fight, while another is doubtful he shall be hit. But when the
first man is sure he shall die, as now the Prince is, he is as much
troubled and apprehensive of it as any man else. For,” says he,
“‘sence we told him that we believe he would overcome his disease,
he is as merry, and swears and laughs and curses and doth all the
things of a [man] in health, as ever he did in his life’”’ — which
methought was a most extraordinary saying, before a great many
persons there of quality. So by and by with Sir W. Penn home
again; and after supper to the office to finish my vows, and so to
bed.