1665-03-22

To Mr. Povys, and with Creed to the Change and to my
house; but it being washing-day, dined not at home, but took him (I
being invited) to Mr. Hublands the merchant, where Sir W. Petty
and abundance of most ingenious men, owners and freighters of the
Experiment, now going with her two bodies to sea. Most excellent
discourse. Among others, Sir Wm. Petty did tell me that in good
earnest, he hath in his will left such parts of his estate to him that
could invent such and such things — as among others, that could
477
discover truly the way of milk coming into the breasts ofa woman—
and he that could invent proper Characters to express to another the
mixture of relishes and tastes. And says that to him that invents
gold, he gives nothing for the Philosopher’s stone; ‘‘for,”’ says he,
“they that find out that will be able to pay themselfs — but,”’ says he,
“by this means it is better then to give to a lecture. For here my
executors, that must part with this, will be sure to be well
convinced of the invention before they do part with their money.”’
Then to Gresham College and there did see a kitlin killed almost
quite (but that we could not quite kill her) with sucking away the
Ayre out of a Receiver wherein she was put — and then the ayre
being let in upon her, revives her immediately. Nay, and this ayre is
to be made by putting together a Liquor and some body that
firments — the steam of that doth do the work. Thence home, and
thence to Whitehall, where the House full of the Dukes going
tomorrow; and thence to St. James, wherein these things fell out:
1 I saw the Duke. Kissed his hand. And had his most kind
expressions of his value and opinion of me, which comforted me
above all things in the world.
2 The like from Mr. Coventry, most heartily and affectionately.
3 Saw, among other fine ladies, Mrs. Middleton, a very great
beauty I never knew or heard of before;
4 Isaw Waller the Poet, whom I never saw before.
So, very late, by coach home with W. Pen, who was there. To
supper and to bed — with my heart at rest and my head very busy,
thinking of my several matters now on foot — the new comfort of
my old Navy business, and the new one of my imployment on
Tanger.