1665-03-28

At the office all the morning. At noon dined at home. After
dinner my wife andI to my Lady Batten’s, it being the first time my
wife hath been there, I think, these two years; but I have a mind in
part to take away that strangeness, and so we did, and all very quiet
and kind. Came home; I to the taking my wife’s kitchen account at
the latter end of the month, and there find 7s. wanting — which did
occasion a very high falling out between us; I endeed too eagerly
insisting upon so poor a thing, and did give her very provoking
words, calling her ‘‘beggar” and reproaching her friends;* which
she took very stomachfully, and reproached me justly with mine;
and I confess, being myself, I cannot see what she could have done
less. Ifind she is very cunning, and when she least shows it, hath her
wit at work; but it is an ill one, though I think not so bad but with
good usage I might well bear with it; and the truth is, I do find that
my being over-solicitous and jealous and froward, and ready to
reproach her, doth make her worse. However, | find that now and
thena little difference doth do not hurt — but too much of it will
make her know her force too much. We parted, after many high
words, very angry; and I to my office to my month’s accounts, and
find myself worth 1270/ — for which the Lord God be praised. So, at
almost 2 a-clock in the morning, I home to supper and to bed.
And so ends this month, with great expectation of the Hol-
473
1665 28 February—7 March
landers coming forth; who are, it seems, very high and rather more
ready then we. God give a good issue to it.
—%MARCH-
1. Up-—and this day being the day that, by a promise a great while
ago made to my wife, I was to give her 20/ to lay out in clothes
against Easter, she did, notwithstanding last night’s falling-out,
come to peace with me and I with her, but did boggle mightily at
the parting with my money, but at last did give it her; and then she
abroad to, buy her things, and I to my office, where busy all the
morning. At noon I to dinner at Trinity house — and thence to
Gresham College, where, first Mr. Hooke read a second very
curious* Lecture about the late Comett, among other things,
proving very probably that this is the very same Comett that
appeared before in the year 1618, and that in such a time probably it
will appear again — which is a very new opinion — but all will be in
print. Then to the meeting, where Sir G. Carterets two sons, his
own and Sir N. Slany, were admitted of the Society. And this day I
did pay my admission money — 40s. — to the Society. Here was very
fine discourses — and experiments; but I do lack philosophy enough
to understand them, and so cannot remember them. Among
others, a very perticular account of the making of the several sorts
of bread in France, which is accounted the best place for bread in the
world.
4. Up very betimes; and walked, it being bitter cold, to Ratcliffe
to the plat-maker’s and back again. To the office, where we sat all
the morning. I, with being empty and full of ayre and wind, had
some pain today. Dined alone at home, my wife being gone abroad
to buy some more things. All the afternoon at the office. At night
home to supper and to bed. This day was proclaimed at the Change
the war with Holland. .
7-8. Up, and was pretty well; but going to the office, and I think
it was sitting with my back to the fire, it set me ina great rage again,
that I could not continue till past noon at the office, but was forced
to go home; nor could sit down to dine, but betook myself to my
bed; and being there a while, my pain begun to abate and grow less
474
and less. Anon I went to make water, not dreaming of anything but
my testicle, that by some accident I might have bruised as I used to
do — but in pissing, there came from me two stones; I could feel
them, and caused my water to be looked into, but without any pain
to me in going out— which makes me think that it was nota fit of the
stone at all; for my pain was asswaged upon my lying down agreat
while before I went to make water. Anon I made water again very
freely and plentifully. I kept my bed in good ease all the evening;
then rose and sat up an hour or two; and then to bed and lay till 8 a-
clock; and then, though a bitter cold day, yet I rose, and though my
pain and tenderness in my testicle remains alittle, yet I do verily
think that my pain yesterday was nothing else, and therefore Ihope
my disease of the stone may not return to me, but void itself in
pissing; which God grant — but I will consult my physitian. This
morning is brought me to the office the sad news of the London, in
which Sir
J.Lawsons men were all bringing her from Chatham to
the Hope, and thence he was to go to sea in her — but a little a-this-
side the buoy of the Nower, she suddenly blew up. About 24 and a
woman that were in the round-house and coach saved; the rest,
being above 300, drowned — the ship breaking all in pieces — with 80
pieces of brass ordinance. She lies sunk, with her round-house
above water. Sir
J.Lawson hatha great loss in this, of so many good
chosen men, and many relations among them. I went to the
Change, where the news taken very much to heart. So home to
dinner, and Mr. Moore with me; then I to Gresham College and
there saw several pretty experiments; and so home and to my office
—and at night, about 11, home to supper and to bed.