1665-11-31

Up, and to the office, where Sir W. Batten met me and did tell
me that Capt. Cockes black was dead of the plague — which I had
heard of before but took no notice. By and by Capt. Cocke came to
the office, and Sir W. Batten and I did send to him that he would
either forbear the office or forbear going to his own office.
However, meeting yesterday the Searchers with their rods in their
hands coming from his house, I did overhear them say that the
fellow did not die of the plague. But he had I know been ill a good
while, and I am told that his boy Jacke is also ill. At noon home to
dinner, and then to the office again, leaving Mr. Hill, if he can, to
get Mrs. Coleman at night. About 9 at night Icame home, and there
find Mrs. Pierce come, and little Franke Tooker and Mr. Hill and
other people, a great many, dancing. Anon comes Mrs. Coleman,
with her husband and Laneare. The dancing ended, and to sing,
which Mrs. Coleman doth very finely, though her voice is decayed
as to strength; but mighty sweet, though saft — and a pleasant jolly
$47
1665 31 October—1 November
woman, and in mighty good humour was tonight. Among other
things, Laneare did at the request of Mr. Hill bring two or three the
finest prints for my wife to see that ever I did see in all my life. But
for singing, among other things, we got Mrs. Coleman to sing part
of the Opera; but above all, her counterfeiting of Capt. Cooke’s
part, in his reproaching his men with Cowardize, Base Slaves &c.,
she doth it most excellently: at it till past midnight, and then broke
up and to bed. Hill and I together again — and being very sleepy, we
had little discourse as we had the other night.
Thus we end the month merrily; and the more, for that after
some fears that the plague would have encreased again this week, I
hear for certain that there is above 400 [decrease] — the whole
number being 1388; and of them, of the plague, 1031. Want of
money in the Navy puts everything out of order. Men grow
mutinous. And nobody here to mind the business of the Navy but
myself. At least, Sir W. Batten for the few days he hath been here
doth nothing. I in great hopes of my place of Surveyor-Generall of
the Victualling, which will bring me 300/ per annum.
~% NOVEMBER#-
1. Lay very long in bed, discoursing with Mr. Hill of most things
of a man’s life, and how little merit doth prevail in the world, but
only favour—and that for myself, chance without merit brought me
in, and that diligence only keeps me so, and will, living as I do
among so many lazy people, that the diligent man becomes
necessary, that they cannot do anything without him. And so told
him of my late business of the victualling and what cares I am in to
keep myself, having to do with people of so different factions at
Court, and yet must be fair with them all- which was very pleasant
discourse for me to tell, as well, as he seemed to take it, for him to
hear. At last up, and it being a very foul day for rain and a hideous
wind, yet having promised I would go, by water to Erith — and
bearing sail, was in danger of oversetting — but made them take
down their sail; and so, cold and wet, got thither as they had ended
their dinner. How[ever], I dined well. And after dinner, all on
shore, my Lord Brouncker with us, to Mrs. Williams’s lodgings,
and Sir W. Batten, Sir Edmd. Pooly and others; and there, it being
my Lord’s birthday, had everyone a greene riband tied in our hats,
548
very foolishly, and methinks mighty disgracefully for my Lord to
have his folly so open to all the world with this woman. But by and
by Sir W. Batten and I took coach, and home to Boremans; and so
going home by the backside, I saw Capt. Cocke lighting out of his
coach (he having been at Erith also with her, but not on board), and
so he would come along with me home to my lodging; and there sat
and supped and talked with us, but we were angry a little a while
about our message to him the other day, about bidding him keep
from the office or his own office because of his black dying. lowned
it and the reason of it, and would have been glad he had been out of
the house, but I could not bid him go; and so supped, and after
much other talk of the sad condition and state of the King’s matters,
we broke up, and my wife andI to bed. This night, coming with Sir
W. Batten into Greenwich, we called upon Coll. Clegatt, who tells
us for certain that the King of Denmarke hath declared to stand for
the King of England; but since, I hear it is wholly false.