1665-09-08

Up, and several with me about business. Anon comes my Lord
Brouncker, as I expected, and we to the enquiring into the business
of the late desertion of the Shipwrights from work, who had left us
for three days together for want of money. And upon this all
morning and brought it to a pretty good issue, that they, we
believe, will come tomorrow to work.
g. Up, and walked to Greenwich; and there we sat and despatched a
good deal of business I had a mind to. At noon by invitation to my
Lord Brouncker’s, all of us, to dinner, where a good venison pasty
and mighty merry. Here was Sir W. Doyly, lately come from
Ipswich about the sick and wounded — and Mr. Eveling and Capt.
Cocke. My wife also was sent for by my Lord Brouncker, by
Cocke, and was here. After dinner my Lord and his mistress would
see her home again, it being a most cursed rainy afternoon, having
had none a great while before. And I, forced to go to the office on
foot through all the rain, was almost wet to the skin, and spoiled my
silk breeches almost. Rained all the afternoon and evening, so as my
letters being done, Iwas forced to get a bed at Capt. Cockes— where
$23
I find Sir W. Doyly and he and Eveling at supper; and I with them,
full of discourse of the neglect of our masters, the great officers of
State, about all businesses, and especially that of money — having
now some thousand prisoners kept to no purpose, at a great charge,
and no money provided almost for the doing of it. We fell to talk
largely of the want of some persons understanding to look after
businesses, but all goes to wrack. “For,” says Capt. Cocke, ‘““My
Lord Treasurer, he minds his ease and lets things go how they will;
ifhe can have his 8000! per annum and a game at Lombre, he is well.
My Lord Chancellor, he minds getting of money and nothing else;
and my Lord Ashly will rob the devil and the Alter but he will get
money if it be to be got.” But that that puts us into this great
melancholy was news brought today, which Capt. Cocke reports
as a certain truth, that all the Dutch fleet, men-of-war and merchant
East India ships, are got every one in from Bergen the 3rd of this
month, Sunday last — which will make us all ridiculous. The fleet
came home with shame to require great deal of money, which is not
to be had—to discharge many men, that must get the plague then or
continue at greater charge on shipboard. Nothing done by them to
encourage the Parliament to give money —nor the Kingdom able to
spare any money ifthey would, at this time of the plague. So that as
things look at present, the whole state must come to Ruine. Full of
these melancholy thoughts, to bed— where thoughI lay the saftest I
ever did in my life, with a down bed (after the Danish manner, upon
me), yet I slept very ill, chiefly through the thoughts of my Lord
Sandwiches concernment in all this ill-success at sea.