1665-10-25

Up, andto my Lord Sandwiches, where several commanders
of whom I took the state of all their ships, and of all could find not
above four capable of going out — the truth is, the want of victuals
being the whole overthrow of this year, both at sea and now at the
Noure here and Portsmouth, where all the fleet lies. By and by
comes down my Lord, and then he and IJ an hour together alone
upon private discourse. He tells me that Mr. Coventry and he are
not reconcilable, but declared enemies. He tells me, as very private,
that there are great factions at the Court between the King’s party
and the Duke of Yorkes, and that the King (which is a strange
difficulty) doth favour my Lord in opposition to the Duke’s party.
That Prince Rupert and he are all possible friends in the world. That
Coventry hath aggravated this business of the prizes, though never
so great plundering in the world as while the Duke and he were at
sea. And inSirJo. Lawsons time he could take and pillage and then
sink a whole ship in the Streights, and Coventry say nothing to it.
That my Lord Arlington is his fast friend. That my Lord Chancellor
doth begin to be cold to him, because of his seeing him and
Arlington so great. That nothing at Court is minded but faction and
pleasure, and nothing intended of general good to the Kingdom by
anybody heartily, so that he believes, with me, in a little time
confusion will certainly come over all the nation. He told me how a
design was carried on a while ago for the Duke of Yorke to raise an
army in the North, and to be General of it, and all this without the
knowledge or advice of the Duke of Albemarle; which when he
came to know, he was so vexed, they were fain to let it fall to
content him. That his maching with the family of Sir G. Carteret
doth make the difference greater between Coventry and him, they
being enemies. After dinner my Lord by a Ketch down to Erith,
where the Bezan was —it blowing these last two days, and now both
night and day very hard Southwardly — so that it hath certainly
drove the Duch off the coast.