1665-09-23

Up, and to my Lord Sandwich — who did advise alone with
me how far he might trust Capt. Cocke in the business of the prize
goods — my Lord telling me that he hath taken into his hands 2 or
3000! value of them. It being a good way, he says, to get money,
and afterward to get the King’s allowance thereof — it being easier,
he observes, to keep money when got of the King, then to get it
when it is too late. Iadvised him not to trust Cocke too far. And did
thereupon offer him ready money for a thousand pound or two,
S31
which he listens to and doth agree to — which is great joy to me,
hoping thereby to get something. Thence by coaches to Lambeth,
his Lordshipp and all our office, and Mr. Eveling, to the Duke of
Albemarle — where after the compliment with my Lord, very kind,
we sat down to consult of the disposing and supporting ofthe fleet
with victuals and money, and for the sick men and prisoners. And I
did propose the taking out of some goods out of the prizes, to the
value of 10000/; which was accorded to, and an order drawn up and
signed by the Duke and my Lord, done in the best manner I can and
referred to my Lord Brouncker and Sir J. Mennes. But what
inconveniences may arise from it] do not yet see, but fear there may
be many. Here we dined, and I did hear my Lord Craven whisper
(as he is mightily possessed with a good opinion of me) much to my
advantage, which my good Lord did second; and anon my Lord
Craven did speak publicly of me to the Duke, in the hearing of all
the rest, and the Duke did say something of the like advantage to
me; I believe, not much to the satisfaction of my brethren — but I
was mightily joyed at it. Thence took leave, leaving my Lord
Sandwich to go visit the Bishop of Canterbury, and I and Sir W.
Batten down to the tower, where he went further by water, and I
home; and among other things, took out all my gold to carry along
with me tonight with Capt. Cocke down to the fleet — being 180l
and more — hoping to lay out that and a great deal more to good
advantage. Thence down to Greenwich to the office, and there
wrote several letters; and so to my Lord Sandwich and mighty
merry, and he mighty kind to me in the face of all, saying much in
my favour; and after supper I took leave and with Capt. Cocke set
out in the Yacht about 10 a-clock at night. And after some discourse
and drinkinga little— my mind full of what we are going about, and
jealous of Cocke’s out-doing me-so to sleep upon beds brought by
Cocke on board, mighty handsome, and never slept better then
upon this bed upon the floor in the Cabbin.