1665-05-30

Lords day. Up, and to my office alone all the morning, making
up my monthly accounts; which though it hath been very intricate,
1. As Treasurer for Tangier.
485
1665 30 April—1 May
and very great disbursements and receipts and odd reckonings, yet I
differed not from the truth — viz., between my first computing
what my profit ought to be, and then what my cash and debts do
really make me worth, not above tos. — which is very much, and I
do much value myself upon that account. And herein, I with great
Joy find myself to have gained this month above tool clear; and in
the whole, to be worth above 1400! — the greatest sum Iever yet was
worth. Thence home to dinner and there find poor Mr. Spong
walking at my door; where he had knocked, and being told I was at
the office, stood modestly there walking, because of disturbing me;
which methinks was one of the most modest acts (ofa man that hath
no need of being so to me) that ever I knew in my life. He dined
with me; and then after dinner, to my closet, where abundance of
mighty pretty discourse; wherein, in a word, I find him the man of
the world that hath of his own ingenuity obtained the most in most
things, being withal no scholler. He gone, I took boat and down to
Woolwich and Deptford; and made it late home, and so to supper
and to bed.
Thus I end this month: in great content as to my estate and
gettings. In much trouble as to the pains I have taken and the rubs I
expect yet to meet with about the business of Tanger. The fleet,
with about 106 ships, upon the coast of Holland, in sight of the
Dutch within the Texell. Great fears of the Sickenesse’ here in the
City, it being said that two or three houses are already shut up. God
preserve us all.
—&KMAY#-
1. Up, and to Mr. Povy’s, and by his bedside talked a good while.
Thence to the Duke of Albemarle, where I sorry to find myself to
comea little late. And so home, and at noon, going to the Change,
met my Lord Brunkerd, Sir Robert Murry, Deane Wilkins, and
Mr. Hooke, going by coach to Coll. Blunt’s to dinner. So they
stopped and took me with them. Landed at the Tower wharf and
thence by water to Greenwich, and there coaches met us and to his
house, a very stately seat for situation and brave plantations; and
among others, a Vineyard. No extraordinary dinner, nor any other
1. The Great Plague.
486
entertainment good — but only, after dinner to the tryall of some
experiments about making of coaches easy. And several we tried,
but one did prove mighty easy (not here for me to describe, but the
whole body of that coach lies upon one long spring) and we all, one
after another, rid in it; and it is very fine and likely to take. These
experiments were the intent of their coming, and pretty they are.
Thence back by coach to Greenwich and in his pleasure-boat to
Deptford; and there stopped, and in to Mr. Evelings, which is a
most beautiful place,’ but it being dark and late, I stayed not; but
Dean Wilkins and Mr. Hooke and I walked to Redriffe, and noble
discourse all day long did please me. And it being late, did take
them to my house to drink, and did give them some sweetmeats —
and thence sent them with a lanthorn home — two worthy persons
as are in England, I think, or the world. So to my Lady Batten,
where my wife is tonight; and so after some merry talk, home to
bed.