1665-08-31

Up, and very betimes, by 6 a-clock, at Deptford; and there
find Sir G. Carteret and my Lady ready to go —I being in my new
coloured-silk suit and coat, trimmed with gold buttons and gold
braid lace round my hands, very rich and fine. By water to the
Ferry, where, when we came, no coach there—and tide of ebb so far
spent as the horse-boat could not get off on the other side the river
to bring away the coach. So we were fain to stay there in the
unlucky Isle of Doggs — in a chill place, the morning cool and wind
$09
1665 31 July
fresh, above two if not three hours, to our great discontent. Yet
being upon a pleasant errand, and seeing that could not be helped,
we did bear it very patiently; and it was worth my observing, I
thought as ever anything, to see how upon these two scores, Sir G.
Carteret, the most passionate man in the world and that was in
greatest haste to be gone, did bear with it, and very pleasant all the
while, at least not troubled much so as to fret and storm at it. Anon
the coach comes — in the meantime there comingacitizen thither
with his horse to go over, that told us he did come from Islington
this morning, and that Proctor the vintener of the Miter in
Woodstreet, and his son, is dead this morning there —of the plague.
He having laid out abundance of money there —and was the greatest
vintener for some time in London for great entertainments. We
fearing the canonicall hour would be past before we got thither, did
with a great deal of unwillingness send away the Licence and
wedding-ring. So that when we came, though we drove hard with
six horses, yet we found them gone from home; and going toward
the church, met them coming from church — which troubled us.
But however, that trouble was soon over
— hearing it was well done
— they being both in their old Cloaths. My Lord Crew giving her —
there being three coach-fulls of them. The young lady mighty sad,
which troubled me; but yet I think it was only her gravity, ina little
greater degree then usual. All saluted her, but I did not till my Lady
Sandwich did ask me whether I had not saluted her or no. So to
dinner, and very merry we were; but yet in such a Sober way as
never almost any wedding was in so great families — but it was
much better. After dinner, company divided, some to cards —
others to talk. My Lady Sandwich and I up to settle accounts and
pay her some money —and mighty kind she is to me, and would fain
have had me gone down for company with her to Hinchingbrooke
— but for my life I cannot. At night to supper, and so to talk and,
which methought was the most extraordinary thing, all of us to
prayers as usual, and the young Bride and bridegroom too. And so
after prayers, Soberly to bed; only, I got into the bridegroom’s
chamber while he undressed himself, and there was very merry —
till he was called to the bride’s chamber and into bed they went. I
kissed the bride in bed, and so the curtaines drawne with the
greatest gravity that could be, and so good-night. But the modesty
and gravity of this business was so decent, that it was to me,
endeed, ten times more delightful then if it had been twenty times
more merry and Joviall. Whereas I feared I must have sat up all
510
31 July 1665
night, we did here all get good beds — andI lay in the same I did
before, with Mr. Brisband, who is a good scholar and sober man;
and we lay in bed, getting him to give me an account of Rome,
which is the most delightful talk a man can have of any traveller.
And so to sleep — my eyes much troubled already with the change of
my drink.
Thus I ended this month with the greatest joy that ever I did any
in my life, because I have spent the greatest part of it with
abundance of joy and honour, and pleasant Journys and brave
entertainments, and without cost of money. And at last live to see
that business ended with great content on all sides. This evening
with Mr. Brisband speaking of inchantments and spells, I telling
him some of my Charmes, he told me this of his own knowledge at
Bourdeaux in France. The words these —
Voicy un Corps mort
Royde comme un Baston
Froid comme Marbre
Leger comme un Esprit,
Levons te au nom de Jesus Christ.
He saw four little Girles, very young ones, all kneeling, each of
them upon one knee; and one begin the first line, whispering in the
eare of the next, and the second to the third, and the third to the
fourth, and she to the first. Then the first begun the second line, and
so round quite through. And putting each one finger only to a boy
that lay flat upon his back on the ground, as if he was dead. At the
end of the words, they did with their four fingers raise this boy as
high as they could reach. And he being there and wondering at it (as
also being afeared to see it — for they would have had him to have
bore a part in saying the words in the room of one of the little girls,
that was so young that they could hardly make her learn to repeat
the words), did, for fear there might be some sleight used in it by
the boy, or that the boy might be light, called the cook of the house,
avery lusty fellow, as Sir G. Carteret’s Cooke, who is very big, and
they did raise him just in the same manner. This is one of the
strangest things I ever heard, but he tells it me of his own
knowledge and I do heartily believe it to be true. I enquired of him
whether they were Protestant or Catholique girls, and he told me
they were Protestant — which made it the more strange to me.
Thus we end this month, as I said, after the greatest glut of
SII
1665 31 July—6 August
content that ever I had; only, under some difficulty because of the
plague, which grows mightily upon us, the last week being about
1700 or 1800 of the plague. My Lord Sandwich, at sea witha
fleet of
about 100 sail to the Norward, expect De Ruyter or the Duch East
India fleet. Myself having obliged both these families in this
business very much, as both my Lady and Sir G. Carteret and his
Lady do confess exceedingly; and the latter two also now call me
Cosen, which I am glad of. So God preserve us all friends long, and
continue health among us.
—“AUGUST
#-
1. Slept and lay long, then up; and my Lord and Sir G. Carteret
being gone abroad, I first to see the bridegroom and bride, and
found them both up, and he gone to dress himself. Both red in the
face and well enough pleased this morning with their night’s
lodging. Thence down, and Mr. Brisband andI to Billiards. Anon
came my Lord and Sir G. Carteret in, who had been looking abroad
and visiting some farms that Sir G. Carteret hath thereabouts — and
among other things, report the greatest stories of the bigness of the
Calfes they find there ready to sell to the butchers; as big, as they
say, as little Cowes. And that they do give them a piece of Chalke to
lick, which they hold makes them white in the flesh within. Very
merry at Dinner, and so to talk and laugh after dinner, and up and
down, some to [one] place, some to another — full of content on all
sides. Anon, about § a-clock, Sir G. Carteret and his lady and I took
coach, with the greatest joy and kindness that could be from the
two families — or that ever I saw with so much appearance, and I
believe reality, in all my life. Drove hard home, and it was night ere
we got to Deptford— where, with much kindness from them to me,
I left them; and home to the office, where I find all well. And being
weary and sleepy, it being very late, I to bed.
6. Lords day. Dressed and had my head combed by my little girle,
to whom Iconfess que je sum demasiado kind, nuper ponendo sepe
mes mains in su dos choses de son breast. Mais ilfaut queje leave it,
lest it bring me to alguno major inconvenience. So to my business
in my chamber — look[ing] over and settling more of my papers
then I could do the two last days I have spent about them. In the
$12
evening, it raining hard, down to Woolwich, where after some
little talk, to bed.