1665-07-26

Up; and after doing
a little business, down to Deptford with
Sir W. Batten — and there left him, and I to Greenwich to the park,
where I hear the King and Duke are come by water this morn from
Hampton Court. They asked me several Questions. The King
mightily pleased with his new buildings there.’ Great variety of
talk — and was often led to speak to the King and Duke. By and by
they to dinner; and all to dinner and sat down to the King saving
myself, which though I could not in modesty expect, yet God
forgive my pride, I was sorry Iwas there, that Sir W. Batten should
say that he could sit down where I could not— though he had twenty
times more reason then J. But this was my pride and folly. The
King having dined, he came down, and I went in the barge with
him, I sitting at the door hearing him and the Duke talk and seeing
and observing their manner of discourse; and God forgive me,
though I adore them with all the duty possible, yet the more a man
considers and observes them, the less he finds of difference between
them and other men, though (blessed be God) they are both princes
of great nobleness and spirits. The Barge put me into another boat
that came to our side, Mr. Holder with a bag of gold to the Duke;
and so they away, and I home to the office. The Duke of
Monmouth is the most skittish, leaping gallant that ever I saw,
alway in action, vaulting or leaping or clambering. Ihome to set my
Journall for these four days in order, they being four days of as great
content and honour and pleasure to me as ever I hope to live or
desire or think anybody else can live. For methinks if a man could
but reflect upon this, and think that all these things are ordered by
God Almighty to make me contented, and even this very marriage
now on foot is one of the things entended to find me content in in
my life and matter of mirth, methinks it should make one mightily
more satisfied in the world then he is. This day poor Robin Shaw at
Backewells died — and Backewell himself now in Flanders. The
King himself asked about Shaw; and being told he was dead, said he
1. At Greenwich Palace.
$07
was very sorry for it. The Sickenessse is got into our parish this
week; and is got endeed everywhere, so that I begin to think of
setting things in order, which I pray God enable me to put, both as
to soul and body.