1665-11-04

They sailed from midnight, and came to Greenwich about § a-
clock in the morning —I, however, lay till about 7 or 8; and so to my
office — my headalittle akeing, partly for want of natural rest —
partly having so much business to do today, and partly from the
news |hear, that one of the little boys at my lodging is not well, and
they suspect that it may be the plague. Sir W. Batten and myself at
the office all the morning. At noon with him to dinner at
Boreman’s, where Mr. Seymour with us — who is a most conceited
fellow, and not over-much in him. Here Sir W. Batten told us
(which Ihad not heard before) that the last sitting-day his cloak was
taken from Mingo, going home to dinner, and that he was beaten
by the seamen, and swears he will come to Greenwich but no more
to the office (till he can sit safe); after dinner, I to the office and there
very late. And much troubled to have 100 seamen all the afternoon
there, swearing below and cursing us and breaking the glass
windows; and swear they will pull the house down on Tuseday
next. I sent word of this to Court, but nothing will help it but
money anda rope. Late at night I to Mr. Glanvill’s, there to lie for a
night or two, and to bed.
5 November 1665
5. Lords day. Up, and after being trimmed, by boate to the
Cockepitt, where I heard the Duke of Albemarle’s chaplain make a
simple sermon. Among other things, reproaching the imperfec-
tion of humane learning, he cried — ‘‘All our physicians can’t tell
what an ague is, and all our Arithmetique is not able to number
the days of a man” — which, God knows, is not the fault of
arithmetique, but that our understandings reach not that thing. To
dinner, where a great deal of silly discourse. But the worst is, I
hear that the plague encreases much at Lambeth, St. Martins, and
Westminster, and fear it will all over the City. Thence I to the
Swan, there thinking to have seen Sarah, but she was at church;
and so by water to Deptford, and there made a visit to Mr.
Evelings, who, among other things, showed me most excellent
painting in little — in distemper, Indian Incke — water colours —
graveing; and above all, the whole secret of Mezzo Tinto and the
manner of it, which is very pretty, and good things done with it.
He read to me very much also of his discourse he hath been many
years and now is about, about Guardenage; which will be a most
noble and pleasant piece. He read me part of a play or two of his
making, very good, but not as he conceits them, I think, to be. He
showed me his Hortus hyemalis; leaves laid up in a book of several
plants, kept dry, which preserve Colour however, and look very
finely, better than any herball. In fine, a most excellent person he
is, and must be allowedalittle for a little conceitedness; but he
may well be so, being a man so much above others. He read me,
though with too much gusto, some little poems of his own, that
were not transcendent, yet one or two very pretty Epigrams:
among others, of a lady looking in at a grate and being pecked at
by an Eagle that was there. Here comes in in the middle of our
discourse, Capt. Cocke, as drunk as a dog, but could stand and
talk and laugh. He didsojoy himself in a brave woman that he had
been with all the afternoon, and who should it be but my Lady
Robinson. But very troublesome he is with his noise and talk and
laughing, though very pleasant. With him in his coach to Mr.
Glanvills, where he sat with Mrs. Penington and myself a good
while, talking of this fine woman again, and then went away.
Then the lady and I to very serious discourse; and among other
things, of what a bonny lass my Lady Robinson is, who is
reported to be kind to the prisoners, and hath said to Sir G. Smith,
who is her great Chrony: “Look, there is a pretty man; I could be
contented to break a commandment with him” — and such loose
SSI
expressions she will have often. After an hour’s talk, we to bed —
the lady mightily troubled about a little pretty bitch she hath,
which is very sick and will eat nothing. And the jest was, I could
hear her in her chamber bemoaning the bitch; and by and by
taking her to bed with her, the bitch pissed and shit abed, and she
was fain to rise and had coals out of my chamber to dry the bed
again. This night, I had a letter that Sir G. Carteret would be in
town tomorrow, which did much surprize me.