1665-10-12

Called up before day, and so I dressed myself and down, it
being horrid cold, by water to my Lord Bruncker’s ship, who
advised me to do so, and it was civilly to show me what the King
had commanded about the prize goods, to examine most severely
all that had been done in the taking out any, with or without order,
without respect to my Lord Sandwich at all — and that he had been
doing of it, and find him examining one man. AndI do find that
extreme ill use was made of my Lord’s order, for they did toss and
tumble and spoil and break things in hold, to a great loss and shame,
to come at the fine goods, and did take a man that knew where the
fine goods were — and did this over and over again for many days —
Sir W. Berkely being the chief hand that did it; but others did the
1. See above, p. 159 (10 October) & n.
S41
like at other times. And they did say in doing it, that my Lord
Sandwichs back was broad enough to bear it. Having learned as
much as I could, which was that the King and Duke are very severe
in this point, whatever order they before had given my Lord in
approbation of what he had done, and that all will come out, and the
King see by the entries at the Custome house what all doth amount
to that had been taken. And so I took leave and by water, very cold,
and to Woolwich — where it was now noon; and so I stayed dinner
and talking part of the afternoon; and then by coach, Capt. Cocke,
to Greenwich, taking the young lady home. And so to Cocke, and
he tells me that he hath cajolled with Seymour, who will be our
friend; but that above all, Seymour tells him that my Lord Duke did
show him today an order from Court for having all respect paid to
the Earle of Sandwich, and what goods had been delivered by his
order — which doth overjoy us; and that tomorrow our goods shall
be weighed and he doubts not, possession tomorrow or next day.
Being overjoyed at this, I to write my letters, and at it very late.
Good news this week that there are about 600 less dead of the plague
then the last. So home to bed.