1666-01-05

1, with my Lord Brouncker and Mrs. Williams, by coach with
568
four horses to London, to my Lord’s house in Covent Guarden. But
Lord, what staring to see a nobleman’s coach come to town — and
porters everywhere bow to us, and such begging of beggars. Anda
delightful thing it is to see the town full of people again, as now it is,
and shops begin to open, though in many places, seven or eight
together, and more, all shut; but yet the town is full compared with
what it used to be —I mean the City end, for Covent Gu[a]rden and
Westminster are yet very empty of people, no Court nor gentry
being there. Set Mrs. Williams down at my Lord’s house, and he
and I to Sir G. Carteret at his chamber at Whitehall, he being come
to town last night to stay one day. So my Lord and he and I, much
talk about the Act,' what credit we find upon it; but no private talk
between him and I. So I to the Change, and there met Mr. Povey,
newly come to town, and he andI to Sir George Smith’s and there
dined nobly. He tells me how my Lord Bellases complains for want
of money, and of him and me therein; but Ivalue it not, for Iknow I
do all that can be done. We had no time to talk of perticulars, but
leave it to another day; and I away to Cornhill to expect my Lord
Brouncker’s coming back again; and I stayed at my Stationer’s
house, and by and by comes my Lord and did take me up; and so to
Greenwich, and after sitting with them a while at their house,
home, thinking to get Mrs. Knipp but could not, she being busy
with company; but sent mea pleasant letter, writing herself Barbary
Allen. | went therefore to Mr. Boreman’s for pastime, and there
stayed an hour or two, talking with him and reading a discourse
about the River of Thames the reason of its being choked up in
several places with Shelfes; which is plain, is by the encroachments
made upon the River, and running-out of Cawseways into the
River at every wood wharfe, which was not heretofore when
Westminster hall and Whitehall was built, and Redriffe church,
which now are sometimes overflown with water. I had great
satisfaction herein; so home, and to my papers for lack of company,
but by and by comes little Mrs. Tooker and sat and supped with
me, and Ikept her very late, talking and making her comb my head;
and did what I will with her et tena grande plaisir con ella, tocando
sa cosa con mi cosa, and hazendo la cosa par cette moyen. So late to
bed.