1666-08-08

Up, and with Reeves walk as far as the Temple, doing some
business in my way, at my bookseller’s and elsewhere; and there
parted, and I took coach (having first discoursed with Mr. Hooke a
little, whom we met in the street, about the nature of Sounds, and
he did make me understand the nature of Musicall sounds made by
Strings, mighty prettily; and told me that having come toa certain
Number of Vibracions proper to make any tone, he is able to tell
how many strokes a fly makes with her wings (those flies that hum
in their flying) by the note that it answers to in Musique during their.
flying. That, I suppose, is a little too much raffined; but his
discourse in general of sound was mighty fine). There I left them,
649
1666 & August
and myself by coach to St. James’s, where we attended with the rest
of my fellows on the Duke, whom I found with two or three
patches upon his nose and about his right eye, which came from
being struck with the bow ofa tree the other day in his hunting; and
it is a wonder it did not strike out his eye. After we had done our
business with him, which is now but little, the want of money
being such as leaves us little to do but to answer complaints of the
want thereof, and nothing to offer to the Duke —- the representing of
our wants of money being now become uselesse — I into the park,
and there I met with Mrs. Burroughs by appointment, and did
agree (after discoursing upon some business of hers) for her to meet
me at the New Exchange; while I by coach to my Lord Treasurer’s,
and then called at the New Exchange, and thence carried her by
water to parliament stayres, and I to the Exchequer about my
Tanger Quarters tallies; and that done, Itook coach and to the west
door of the abby, where she came to me; and I with her by coach to
Lissen greene, where we were last, and stayed an hour or two
before dinner could be got for us, I in the meantime having much
pleasure with her, but all honest. And by and by dinner came up,
and then to my sport again, but still honest; and then took coach,
and up and down in the country toward Acton, and then toward
Chelsy, and so to Westminster, and there set her down where I took
her up, with mighty pleasure in her company; and so I by coach
home, and thence to Bow with all the haste I could, to my Lady
Pooly’s, where my wife was with Mr. Batelier and his sisters; and
there I found a noble Supper, and everything exceeding pleasant;
and their mother, Mrs. Batelier, a fine woman (but mighty
passionate upon sudden news brought her of the loss of a dog,
borrowed of the Duke of Albemarle’s son to limea bitch ofhers that
is very pretty; but the dog was by and by found, and so all well
again); their company mighty innocent and pleasant, we having
never been here before.
About 10 a-clock we rose from table, and sang a song, and so
home in two coaches (W. Batelier and his sister Mary and my wife
and I in one, and Mercer alone in the other); and after being
examined at Allgate whether we were husbands and wifes, home.
And being there come and sent away W. Batelier and his sister, I
find Reeves there, it being a mighty fine bright night; and so upon
my leads, though very sleepy, till one in the morning, looking on
the moon and Jupiter with this 12-foot glass, and another of 6-foot
that he hath brought with him tonight, and the sights mighty
650
pleasant. And oneofthe glasses I will buy, it being very usefull. So
to bed, mighty sleepy, but with much pleasure— Reeves lying at my
house again; and mighty proud I am (and ought to be thankful to
God Almighty) that I am able to have a spare bed for my friends.