1666-05-29

King’s Birth and Restauracion day. Waked with the ringing of
the bells all over the town. So up before 5 a-clock, and to the office,
where we met; and I all the morning with great trouble upon my
spirit to think how I should come off in the afternoon when Sir W.
Coventry did go to the Victualling Office to see the state of matters
there. And methought, by his doing of it without speaking to me,
and only with Sir W. Penn, it must be of design to find my
negligence. However, at noon I did, upon a small invitation of Sir
W. Pen’s go and dine with Sir W. Coventry athis.office, where
great good cheer — and many pleasant stories of Sir W. Coventry,
but I had no pleasure in them. However, I had last night and this
morning made myselfa
little able to report how matters were— and
did readily go with them after dinner to the Victualling Office; and
there beyond belief did acquit myself very well, to full content.
Being broke up there, I with a merry heart home to my office; and
thither my wife comes to me to tell me that if I would see the
handsomest woman in England, I shall come home presently; and
who should it be but the pretty lady of our parish that did heretofore
sit on the other side of our church over against our gallery, that is
since married. She, with Mrs. Anne Jones, one of this parish that
dances finely, did come to see her this afternoon. And so I home,
and there found Creed also come to me; so there I spent most of the
620
afternoon with them; and endeed, she is a pretty black woman -—
her
name, Mrs. Horesely. But Lord, to see how my nature could not
refrain from the temptation, but I must invite them to go to Foxhall
to Spring Garden, though I had freshly received minutes of a great
deal of extraordinary business. However, I could not help it; but
sent them before with Creed, and I did some of my business, and so
after them and find them there in an Arbour; and had met with Mrs.
Pierce and some company-with her. So here Ispent 20s. upon them,
and were pretty merry. Among other things, had a fellow that
imitated all manner of birds and dogs and hogs with his voice,
which was mighty pleasant. Stayed here till night; then set Mrs.
Pierce in at the New Exchange, and ourselfs took coach and so set
Mrs. Horsly home, and then home ourselfs, but with great trouble
in the streets by bonefires, it being the King’s birthday and day of
restoration; but Lord, to see the difference, how many there was on
the other side, and so few our, the City side of Temple, would make
one wonder the difference between the temper of one sort of people
and the other — and the difference among all, between what they do
now, and what it was the night when Monke came into the City! -
such a night as that I never think to see again, not think it can be.
After I came home, I was till one in the morning with Capt. Cocke
drawing up a contract with him, intended to be offered to the Duke
tomorrow — which if it proceeds, he promises me so0ol.