1666-06-04

Up, and withSir Jo. Minnes and Sir W. Pen to Whitehall in the
latter’s coach — where when we came, we find the Duke at St.
James’s, whither he is lately gone to lodge. So walking through the
park, we saw hundreds of people listening at the Gravell pits, and to
and again in the park to hear the guns. And I sawaletter, dated last
night, from Strowd, Governor of Dover Castle, which says that the
Prince came thither the night before with his fleet. But that for the
guns which we writ that we heard, it is only a mistake for Thunder;
and so far as to yesterday, it is a miraculous thing that we all Friday
and Saturday and yesterday did hear everywhere most plainly the
guns go off, and yet at Deale and Dover, to last night, they did not
hear one word ofa
fight, nor think they heard one gun. This, added
to what I have set down before the other day about the Katharine,
makes room fora great dispute in Philosophy: how we should hear
it and not they, the same wind that brought it to us being the same
that should bring it to them. But so it is. After Wayting upon the
Duke, Sir W. Penn (who was commanded to go to rights by water
down to Harwich to despatch away all the ships he can) and Ihome,
drinking two bottles of Cocke ale in the street, in his new fine
coach, and so home — where no sooner come, but news is brought
me of
a couple of men come to speak with me from the fleet. So I
down, and who should it be but Mr. Daniel, all muffled up, and his.
face as black as the chimney and covered with dirt, pitch and tar,
and powder, and muffled with dirty clouts and his right eye stopped
with Okum. He is come last night at 5 a-clock from the fleet, witha
comrade of his that hath endangered another eye. They were set on
shore at Harwich this morning at 2 a-clock in a ketch, with about
twenty more wounded men from the Royal Charles. They being
able to ride, took post about 3 this morning and was here between
11 and 12. I went presently into the coach with them, and carried
them to Sumersett house stairs and there took water (all the world
gazing upon us and concluding it to be news from the fleet; and
everybody’s face appeared expecting of news) to the Privy stairs
625
1666 4 June
and left them at Mr. Coventry’s lodging (he, though, not being
there); and so I into the park to the King, and told him my Lord
Generall was well the last night at 5 o’clock, and the Prince come
with his fleet and joyned with his about 7. The King was mightily
pleased with this news and so took me by the hand and talkeda
little
of it—I giving him the best account Icould; and then he bid me fetch
the two seamen to him — he walking into the house. So I went and
fetched the seamen into the Vane-room to him, and there he heard
the whole account.
The Fight'
How we found the Duch fleet at anchor on Friday, half-seas-
over, between Dunkirke and Oastend, and made them let slip their
Anchors — they about 90, and we less then 60. We fought them and
put them to the run, till they met with about 16 sail of fresh ships
and so bore up again. The fight continued till night, and then again
the next morning from ¢ till 7 at night — and so too, yesterday
morning they begun again, and continued till about 4 a-clock — they
chasing us for the most part of Saturday and yesterday; we fleeing
from them. The Duke himself, then those people, were put into the
ketch, and by and by spied the Prince’s fleet coming — upon which,
De Ruyter called a little council (being in chase at this time of us);
and thereupon their fleet divided into two squadrons, 40 in one and
about 30 in the other (the fleet being at first about 90, but by one
accident or other supposed to be lessened to about 70); the bigger to
fallow the Duke, the less to meet the Prince. But the Prince came up
with the Generalls fleet, and the Dutch came together again and
bore toward their own coast — and we with them. And now, what
the consequence of this day will be, that we [hear] them fighting,
we know not. The Duke was forced to come to Anchor on Friday,
having lost his sails and rigging. No perticular person spoken of to
be hurt but Sir W. Clerke, who hath lost his leg, and bore it bravely.
The Duke himself had a little hurt in his thigh, but signified little.
The King did pull out of his pocket about twenty pieces in gold, and
did give it Daniel for himself and his companion. And so parted,
mightily pleased with the account he did give him of the fight and
the success it ended with — of the Prince’s coming — though it seems
the Duke did give way again and again. The King did give order for
care to be had of Mr. Daniel and his companion; and so we parted
1. The Four Days Battle, 1-4 June.
626
from him, and then met the Duke and gave him the same account;
and so broke up, andI left them going to the surgeon’s; and I myself
by water to the Change, and to several people did give account of
the business; and so home about 4 a-clock to dinner and was
fallowed by several people home, to be told the news, and good
news it is.
Fresh letters are come from Harwich — where the Glocester, Capt.
Clerke, is come in. And says that on Sunday night, upon coming in
of the Prince, the Duch did fly. But all this day they have been
fighting; therefore, they did face again, to be sure. Capt. Bacon of
the Bristoll is killed. They cry up Jenings of the Ruby and Saunders
of the Sweepstakes. They condemn mightily Sir Tho. Teddiman for
a Coward, but with what reason, time must show. Having heard all
this, Creed and I walked into the park till 9 or 10 at night, it being
fine moonshine — discoursing of the unhappiness of our fleet. What
it would have been if the Prince had not come in. How much the
Duke hath failed of what he was so presumptuous of. How little we
deserve of God Almighty to give us better fortune. How much this
excuse[s] all that was imputed to my Lord Sandwich; and how
much more he is a man fit to be trusted with all these matters then
these that now command, who act by nor with any advice, but
rashly and without any order. How bad we are at intelligence, that
should give the Prince no sooner notice of anything, but let him
come to Dover without notice of any fight, or where the fleet were,
or anything else; nor give the Duke any notice that he might depend
upon the Prince’s reserve. And lastly, of how good use all may be to
check our pride and presumption in adventuring upon hazards
upon unequal force, against a people that can fight, it seems now, as
well as we, and that will not be discouraged by any losses, but that
they will rise again. Thence by water home, and to supper (my
father, wife, and sister having been at Islington today at Pitts’s) and
to bed.