1666-12-16

Lords day. Lay long, talking with my wife in bed. Then up
with great content, and to my chamber to set right a picture or two
— Lovett having sent me yesterday Santa Clara’s head varnished,
which is very fine. And now my closet is so full stored and so fine,
as I would never desire to have it better. Dined without any
strangers with me — which I do not like on Sundays. Then after
dinner by water to Westminster to see Mrs. Martin, whom I found
up in her chamber and ready to go abroad. I sat there with her and
her husband and others a pretty while; and then away to Whitehall
and there walked up and down to the Queen’s side, and there saw
my dear Lady Castlemayne, who continues admirable methinks —
and I do not hear but that the King is the same to her still as ever.
Anon to chapel, by the King’s closet, and heard a very good
Anthemne. Then with Lord Brouncker to Sir W. Coventry’s
chamber, and there we sat with him and talked. He is weary of
anything to do, he says, in the Navy. He tells us this Committee of
Accounts! will enquire sharply into our office; and (speaking of Sir
J. Mennes) he says he will not bear anybody’s faults but his own. He
discoursed as bad of Sir W. Batten almost. And cries out upon the
disciplineofthe fleet, which is lost. And that there is not, in any of
the fourth-rates, and under, scarce left one Sea Comander, but all
young gentlemen. And which troubles him, he hears that the
gentlemen do give out that in two or three years a Tarpawlin shall
not dare to look after being better then a Boatswain — which he is
troubled at, and with good reason. So we parted, and I with Lord
Brouncker to Sir P. Neale’s chamber, and there sat and talked
awhile — Sir Edwd. Walker being there, and telling us how he hath
lost many fine Rowles of antiquity in Heraldry by the late fire, but
hath saved the most of his papers. Here was also Dr. Wallis, the
famous scholar and mathematician; but he promises little. Left
them, and in the dark and cold home by water; and so to supper and
to read, and so to bed — my eyes being better today — and I cannot
impute it to anything but my being much in the dark tonight, for I
plainly find that it is only excess oflight that makes my eyes sore.