1666-11-09

Up and to the office, where did a good deal of business. And
then at noon to the Exchange and to my little goldsmith’s, whose
wife is very pretty and modest, that ever I saw any. Upon the
Change, where I have seldomoflate been, Ifind all people mightily
at a loss what to expect, but confusion and fears in every man’s head
1. For the Plague.
689
1666 9 November
and heart. Whether war or peace, all fear the event will be bad.
Thence home and with my brother to dinner, my wife being
dressing herself against night. After dinner I to my closet all the
afternoon, till the porter brought my vest back from the Taylors,
and then to dress myself very fine, about 4 or 5 a-clock; and by that
time comes Mr. Batelier and Mercer, and away by coach to Mrs.
Pierces by appointment, where we find good company —a fair lady,
my Lady Prettyman — Mrs. Corbet — Knipp. And for men, Capt.
Downing — Mr. Lloyd, Sir W. Coventry’s clerk — and one Mr.
Tripp, who dances well. After some trifling discourse, we to
dancing and very good sport, and mightily pleased I was with the
company. After our first bout of dancing, Knipp andI to sing, and
Mercer and Capt. Downing (who loves and understands music)
would by all means have my song of Beauty Retire — which Knipp
hath spread abroad, and he extols it above anything he ever heard.
And without flattery, I think it is good in its kind. This being done,
and going to dance again, comes news that Whitehall was on fire —
and presently more perticulars, that the Horse guard was on fire.
And so we run up to the garret and find it so, a horrid great fire—and
by and by we saw and heard part of it blown up with powder. The
ladies begun presently to be afeared — one fell into fits. The whole
town in an Alarme. Drums beat and trumpets, and the guards
everywhere spread — running up and down in the street. And I
begun to have mighty apprehensions how things might be at home,
and so was in mighty pain to get home; and that that encreased all is
that we are in expectation (from common fame) this night or
tomorrow to have a Massacre — by the having so many fires one
after another — as that in the City. And at the same time begun in
Westminster by the Palace, but put out — and since in Southworke,
to the burning down some houses; and now this, doth make all
people conclude there is something extraordinary in it, but nobody
knows what. By and by comes news that the fire is slackened; so
then we were alittle cheered up again, and to supper and pretty
merry. After supper another dance or two, and then news that the
fire is as great as ever, which put us all to our wit’s end, and |
mightily [eager] to go home; but the coach being gone, and it being
about 10 at night and rainy dirty weather, Iknew not what to do but
to walk out with Mr. Batelier, myself resolving to go home on foot
and leave the women there. And so did; but at the Savoy got a coach
and came back and took up the women; and so (having by people
come from the fire understood that the fire was overcome, and all
690
well) we merrily parted, and home. Stopped by several guards and
Constables quite through the town (round the wall as we went), all
being in armes. We got well home; and in the way I did con mi
mano tocar la jambe de Mercer sa chair. Elle retirait sa jambe
modestement, but I did tocar sa peau with my naked hand. And the
truth is, la fille hath something that is assez jolie. Being come home,
we to Cards till 2 in the morning; and drinking lamb’s-wool, to
bed.