1666-03-23

Up, and going out of my dressing-room when ready to go
downstairs, Ispied little Mrs. Tooker, my pretty little girl, which it
seems did come yesterday to our house to staya little while with us,
but I did not knowofit till now. Iwas glad of her coming, she being
a very pretty child and now grown almost a woman. I out by 6
a-clock by appointment to Hales’s, where we fell to my picture
presently very hard, and it comes ona very fine picture — and very
merry, pleasant discourse we had all the morning while he was
painting. Anon comes my wife, and Mercer and little Tooker. And
having done with me, we all to a picture drawer’s hard by, Hales
600
carrying me to see some lanskip of a man’s doing — but I do not
[like] any of them, save onlya piece of fruit, which endeed was very
fine. Thence I to Westminster to the Chequer abouta
little business,
and then to the Swan and there sent for a bit of meat and dined, and
after dinner had opportunity of being pleased with Sarah; and so
away to Westminster hall, and there Mrs. Michell tells me with
great joy how little Betty Howlet is married to her young son
Michell; which is a pretty odd thing, that he should so soon succeed
in that match to his elder brother, that died of the plague—and to the
house and trade entended for him. And more, they say that the girle
hath heretofore said that she did love this little one more then the
other brother that was entended her all along. I am glad of this
match, and more that they are likely to live near me in Thames
street — where I may see Betty now and then, whom! froma girl did
use to call my second wife,’ and mighty pretty she is. Thence by
coach to Anthony Joyce to receive Harman’s answer; which did
trouble me to receive, for he now demands 800l, whereas he never
made exception at the portion, but accepted of sool — this I do not
like; but however, I cannot much blame the man, if he thinks he can
get more of another then of me. So home, and hard to my business
at the office, where much business; and so home to supper and to
bed.