1666-07-15

Lords day. Up, and to church, where our lecturer made a sorry
silly sermon upon the great point of proving the truth of the
Christian religion. Home, and had a good dinner, expecting Mr.
Hunt, but there comes only young Michell and his wife — whom
my wife concurs with me to be a pretty woman, and with her
husband, is a pretty innocent couple. Mighty pleasant we were, and
I mightily pleased in her company and to find my wife so well
pleased with them also. After dinner he and I walked to Whitehall,
not being able to get a coach — he to the Abbey and I to Whitehall;
but met with nobody to discourse with, having no great mind to be
found idling there and be asked questions of the fleet; so walked
only through to the park, and there, it being mighty hot, and J
weary, lay down by the Canaille upon the grasse and slept a while,
and was thinking ofaLampoone which hath run in my head this
week, to make upon the late fight at sea and the miscarriages there —
but other businesses put it out of my head. Having lain there a
while, I then to the Abbey and there called Michell; and so walked
in great pain, having new shoos on, as far as Fleet street; and there
got a coach, and so in some little ease home-—and there dranka great
deal of small beer. And so took up my wife and Betty Michell and
her husband, and away into the fields to take the ayre — as far as
beyond Hackny, and so back again. In our way drinking a great
deale of Milke, which I drank to take away my Heartburne,
642
15-18 July | 1666
wherewith I have been of late mightily troubled. But all the way
homeI did break abundance of wind behind — which did presage no
good, but a great deal of cold gotten. So home and supped; and
away went Michell and his wife — of whom I stole two or three
salutes. And so to bed, in some pain and in fear of more — which
accordingly I met with, for I was in mighty pain all night long, of
the Winde griping of my belly and making of me shit often, and
vomit too — which is a thing not usual with me. But this Iimpute to
the milk that I drank, after so much beer. But the cold, to my
washing my feet the night before.
18. Up in good ease, and so by coach to St. James’s after my
fellows, and there did our business, which is mostly every day to
complain of want of money — and that only will undo us inalittle
time. Here, among other things, before us all, the Duke of York did
say that now at length he is come to a sure knowledge that the Duch
did lose in the late engagements 29 captains and 13 ships — upon
which, Sir W. Coventry did publicly move that if his Royal
Highness had this of a certainty, it would be of use to send this
down to the fleet, and to cause it to be spread about the fleet for the
recovering of the spirits of the officers and seamen — who are under
great dejectedness for want of knowing that they did do anything
against the enemy, notwithstanding all that they did to us — which
though it be true, yet methought was one of the most dishonour-
able motions to our countrymen that ever was made —and is worth
remembering. Thence with Sir W. Pen home, calling at Lillys to
have a time appointed when to be drawn among the other
Commanders of Flags the last year’s fight. And so full of work Lilly
is, that he was fain to take his table-book out to see how his time is
appointed; and appointed six days hence for him to come, between
7 and 8 in the morning. Thence with him home; and there by
appointmentI find Dr. Fuller, now Bishop of Limbricke in Ireland
— whom I knew in his low condition at Twittenham. I had also, by
his desire, Sir W. Penn, and with him his lady and daughter. And
had a good dinner, and find the Bishopp the same good man as ever;
and in a word, kind to us, and methinks one of the comeliest and
most becoming Pr[e]lates in all respects that ever I saw in my life.
During dinner comes an acquaintance of his, Sir Thomas Littleton —
whom I knew not while he was in my house, but liked his
discourse. And afterward by Sir W. Penn do come to know that he
is one of the greatest speakers in the House of Commons, and the
643
usual Second to the great Vaughan. So was sorry I did observe him
no more and gain more of his acquaintance. After dinner, they
being gone, and I mightily pleased with my guests — I down the
River to Greenwich about business; and thence walked to Wool-
wich, reading The Rivall Ladys all the way, and find it a most
pleasant and fine-writ play. At Woolwige saw Mr. Shelden, it
being late, and there eat and drank, being kindly used by him and
Bab; and so by water to Depford, it being 10 a-clock before I got to
Depford, and dark — and there to Bagwell’s. And having stayed
there a while, away home; and after supper to bed. The Duke of
York said this day, that by letters from the Generalls', they would
sail with the fleet this day or tomorrow.