1666-05-23

Up by 5§ a-clock, and to my chamber, setting several matters
in order. So out toward Whitehall, calling in my way on my Lord
Bellaces — where I came to his bedside and did give me a full and
long account of his matters how he left them at Tanger. Declares
himself fully satisfied with my care. Seems cunningly to argue for
encreasing the number of men there. Told me the whole story of his
gains by the Turky prizes, which he owns he hath got about so00ol
by. Promised me the same profits Povy was to have had. And in
fine, I find him a pretty subtle man; and so I left him and to
Whitehall before the Duke and did our usual business, and eased my
mind of two or three things of weight that lay upon me about
Lanyon’s salary, which I have got to be 150l per annum. Thence to
Westminster to look after getting some little for some great tallies,
but shall find trouble in it. Thence homeward, and met with Sir Ph.
Warwicke and spoke about this, in which he is scrupulous. After
that, to talk of the wants of the Navy; he lays all the fault now upon
618
the new act, and owns his own folly in thinking once so well of it as
to give way to others’ endeavours about it. And is grieved at heart
to see what pass things are like to come to. Thence to the Excize
Office to the Commissioners to get a meeting between them and
myself and others about our concernments in the Excise for
Tanger. And so to the Change a while, and thence home with
Creed and find my wife at dinner with Mr. Cooke, who is going
down to Hinchingbrooke; after dinner Creed and I and wife and
Mercer out by coach, leaving them at the New Exchange, while I to
Whitehall and there stayed at Sir G. Carteret’s chamber till the
Council rose; and then he and I, by agreement this morning, went
forth in his coach by Tiburne to the park — discoursing of the state of
the Navy as to money, and the state of the Kingdom too; how ill
able to raise more. And of our office, as to the condition of the
officers — he giving me caution as to myself, that there are those that
are my enemies too, as well as his; and by name, my Lord
Bruncker, who hath said some odd speeches against me. So that he
advises me to stand on my guard — whichI shall do; and unless my
too-much addiction to pleasure undo me, will be hard enough for
any of them. We rode to and again in the park a good while; and at
last home and set me down at Charing cross; and thence I to Mrs.
Pierce’s to take up my wife and Mercer — where I find her new
picture by Hales doth not please her, nor me endeed, it making no
show nor is very like nor no good painting. Home to supper and to
bed — having my right eye sore and full of humour of late, I think by
my late change of my brewer and having of 8s. beere.