1666-06-10

Lords day. Pierce the surgeon tells me how the Duke of York is
wholly given up to his new mistress, my Lady Denham, going at
noonday, with all his gentlemen with him, to visit her in Scotland
yard — she declaring she will not be his mistress, as Mrs. Price, to go
up and down the privy stairs, but will be owned publicly; and so she
is. Mr. Brouncker it seems was the pimp to bring it about, and my
Lady Castlemayne, who designs thereby to fortify herself by the
Duke — there being a falling-out the other day between King and
her. On this occasion the Queene, in ordinary talk before the ladies
in her drawing-room, did say to my Lady Castlemayne that she
feared the King did take cold by staying so late abroad at her house.
She answered, before them all, that he did not stay so late abroad
with her, for he went betimes thence (though he doth not before 1,
2, or 3 in the morning), but must stay somewhere else. The King
then coming in, and overhearing, did whisper in the eare aside and
told her she was a bold impertinent woman, and bid her be gone out
of the Court arid not come again till he sent for her — which she did
presently; and went to a lodging in the Pell mell and kept there two
or three days, and then sent to the King to know whether she might
send for her things away out of her house; the King sent to her, she
must first come and view them; and so she came, and the King went
629
to her and all friends again. He tells me she did in her anger say she
would be even with the King, and print his letters to her. So putting
all together, we are, and are like to be, ina sad condition. We are
endeavouring to raise money by borrowing it on the City; but Ido
not think the City will lend a farthing.
Sir G. Carteret tells me, as I hear from everybody else, that the
management in the late fight was bad from top to bottom. That
several have said this would not have been, if my Lord Sandwich
had had the ordering of it. Nay, he tells me that certainly, had my
Lord Sandwich had the misfortune to have done as they have done,
the King could not have saved him. There is, too, nothing but dis-
content among the officers; and all the old experienced men are
slighted. He tells me, to my question (but as a great secret), that the
dividing of the fleet’ did proceed first from a proposition from the
fleet, though agreed to hence. But he confesses it arose from want of
due intelligence — which he confesses we do want. He doth, how-
ever, call the fight on Sunday a very honourable retreat, and that
the Duke of Albemarle did do well in it, and could have been well
ifhe had done it sooner, rather than venture the loss of the fleet and
crown, as he must have done if the Prince had not come.