1666-02-23

Up betimes, and out of doors by 6 of the clock and walked
(W. How with me) to my Lord Sandwiches, who did lie the last
night at his house in Lincolns Inne fields — it being fine walking in
the morning, and the streets full of people again. There Istayed, and
the house full of people come to take leave of my Lord, who this day
goes out of Towne upon his Embassy towards Spayne. And I was
glad to find Sir W. Coventry to come, though I know it is only a
piece of Courtshipp. Ihad much discourse with my Lord, he telling
me how fully he leaves the King his friend. But we could not make
an end of discourse, so I promised to wait upon [him] on Sunday at
Cranborne. And took leave, and away thence to Mr. Hales’s (with
Mr. Hill and two of the Houblons, who came thither to speak with
me) and there saw my wife’s picture, which pleases me well; but
Mr. Hills picture never a whit so well as it did before it was finished,
which troubled me — andI begin to doubt the picture of my Lady
Peters my wife’s takes her posture from, and which is an excellent
picture, is not of his making, it is so master-like. I set them down at
588
23-25 February | 1666
the Change, and I home to the office, and at noon dined at home,
and to the office again. Anon comes Mrs. Knipp to see my wife,
who is gone out; soI fain to entertain her, and took her out by coach
to look my wife at Mrs. Pierces and Unthankes, but find her not; so
back again, and then my wife comes home, having been buying of
things. And at home Ispent all the night talking with this baggage
and teaching her my song of Beauty retire, which she sings and
makes go most rarely, and a very fine song it seems to be. She also
entertained me with repeating many of her own and others’ parts of
the playhouse, which she doth most excellently; and tells me the
whole practices of the playhouse and players, and is in every respect
most excellent company. So I supped, and was merry at home all
the evening, and the rather it being my Birthday, 33 years — for
which God be praised that I am in so good a condition of health and
state and everything else as I am, beyond expectation in all. So she
to Mrs. Turner’s to lie, and we to bed — mightily pleased to find
myself in condition to have these people come about me, and to be
able to entertain them and have the pleasure of their qualities, then
which no man can have more in this world.
25. Lords day. My wife up between 3 and 4 of the clock in the
morning to dress herself, and I about 5, and were all ready to take
coach, she and I and Mercer a little past 5; but to our trouble, the
coach did not come till 6. Then, with our coach offour horses I hire
on purpose, and Lashmore to ride by, we through the City, it being
clear day, to Branford, and so to Windsor (Capt. Ferrer overtaking
us at Kensington, being to go with us) and here drank; and so
through, making no stay, to Cranborne about 11 a-clock, and
found my Lord and the ladies at a sermon in the house — which
being ended, we to them; and all the company glad to see us, and
mighty merry to dinner. Here was my Lord, and Lord Hinch-
ingbrooke and Mr. Sidny — Sir Ch. Herbert and Mr. Carteret — my
Lady Carteret, my Lady Jemimah, and Lady Slaning. After dinner
to talk to and again, and then to walk in the Parke, my Lord and I
alone, talking upon these heads —
first, he hath left his business of
the prizes as well as is possible for him, having cleared himself
before the Commissioners by the King’s commands, so that
nothing or little is to be feared from that point — he goes fully
assured, he tells me, of the King’s favour. That upon occasion Imay
know, I desired to know his friends I may trust to. He tells me, but
that he is not yet in England but continues this summer in Ireland,
589
1666 25 February
my Lord Orrery is his father almost in affection. He tells me, my
Lord of Suffolke — Lord Arlington — Archbishop of Canterbury —
Lord Treasurer— Mr. Atturny Mountagu — (Sir Tho. Clifford in the
House of Commons), Sir G. Carteret, and some others I cannot
presently remember, are friends that I may rely on for him. He tells
me my Lord Chancellor seems his very good friend, but doubts that
he may not think him as mucha servant of the Duke of York’s as he
would have him; and endeed my Lord tells me he hath lately made it
his business to be seen studious of the King’s favour, and not of the
Duke’s, and by the King will stand or fall — for factions there are, as
he tells me, and God knows how high they may come. The Duke of
Albemarles post is so great, having had the name of bringing in the
King, that he is like to stand; or, if it were not for him, God knows
in what troubles we might be from some private factions, if an
army could be got into another hand, which God forbid. It is
believed that though Mr. Coventry be in appearance so great
against the Chancellor, yet that there is a good understanding
between the Duke’ and him. He dreads the issue of this year, and
fears there will be some very great revolutions* before his coming
back again. He doubts it is needful for him to have a pardon for his
last year’s action,’ all which he did without commission, and at
most but the King’s private single word for that of Bergen; but he
dares not ask it at this time, lest it should make them think that there
is something more in it then yet they know; and if it should be
denied, it would be of very ill consequence. He says also, ifit should
in Parliament be enquired into, the selling of Dunkirke (though the
Chancellor was the man that would have it sold to France, saying
the King of Spain had no money to give for it), yet he will be found
to have been the greatest adviser of it — which he isa little
apprehensive may be called upon this Parliament. He told me it
would not be necessary for him to tell me his debts, because he
thinks I know them so well. The Duke hath for this week or two
been very kind to him, more then lately, and so others; which he
thinks is a good sign of fair weather again. He says the Archbishop
of Canterbury hath been very kind to him, and hath plainly said to
him that he and all the world knows the difference between his
judgment and brains and the Duke of Albema[r]les — and then calls
my Lady Duchess the veriest slut and drudge, and the foulest word
1. The Duke of York.
2. The prize goods affair.
$90
22. The Diary manuscript
:
r heh cif - A. Dy. Dee he
‘es fo Pusly se
4 AA he oe a R. fea %
F, 2. A ac if, ad
ae c f ee € Xx K 2 & A > r Z
me Aw : a as Holosie ra £% "
/ %
fv yA 4 rf _ x»? R
f ‘ foo et if vy -
a 6 4 7 ft’ ¢ A @“Wf? < c Sew ( “A ( A
POP C1 2
1 I cae :
23. (above) 25 September 1660. “To the office. . . and went away’ (see p. 81)
24. (below) s5—8June 1668. Note-form passage (see p. 921)
vate:
+
:
as i
mit
Pets ce
. we
} 4 weg . hay fe
4 aes bas
£* f ee
a « 4 ay
: - 2. ae
‘ 2 i we
‘ 4A A
’ . g Gf fe # 5 j :
o- f= ee,
f %
; a :
? é ‘ »
! *
bee i Siathinnrccitimmenncentiiionsié® — i
ene
a £ # Fh ses z 3
* + Po ay
4 ‘. t. a: ? : Oe } @
'
25. The Diary manuscript: the last page, with Pepys’s end bookplate
that can be spoke ofawoman almost. My Lord having walked an
hour with me talking thus, and going in, and my Lady Carteret not
suffering me to go back again tonight, my Lord to walk again with
me about some of this and other discourse; and then in a-doors and
to talk, he alone with my Lady Carteret, andI with the young ladies
and gentlemen, who played on the guittarr and mighty merry, and
anon to supper; and then my Lord going away to write, the young
gentlemen to flinging cushions and other mad sports. At this late,
till towards 12 at night; and then being sleepy, I and my wife in a
passage-room to bed, and slept not very well, because of noise.