1666-08-29

Lords day. Up and all the morning in my chamber, making up
my accounts in my book with my father and brother, and stating
them. Towards noon, before sermon was done at church, comes
news by a letter to Sir W. Batten (to my hand) of the late fight’ —
which I sent to his house, he at church: but Lord, with what
impatience I stayed till sermon was done, to know the issue of the
fight, with a thousand hopes and fears and thoughts about the
consequences of either. At last sermon is done and he came home,
and the bells immediately rung as soon as the church was done; but
coming to Sir W. Batten to know the news, his letter said nothing
of it— but all the town is full ofa victory. By and by, aletter from Sir
W. Coventry tells me that we have the victory. Beat them into the
Weelings. Had taken two of their great ships, but by the orders of
the Generals they are burned — this being methought but a poor
result after the fighting of two so great fleets; and four days having
no tidings of them, I was still impatient — but could know no more;
so away home to dinner, where Mr. Spong and Reeves dined with
1. The Battle of St James’s Day, 25 July.
646
29 July—5 August 1666
me by invitation. After dinner to our business of my Microscope,
to be shown some ofthe observables of that; and then down to my
office to look in a dark room with my glasses and Tube, and most
excellently things appeared indeed, beyond imagination. This was
our work all the afternoon, trying the several glasses and several
objects; among others, one of my plats, where the lines appeared so
very plain, that it is not possible to think how plain it was done.
Thence, satisfied exceedingly with all this, we home, and to
discourse many pretty things; and so stayed out the afternoon till it
begun to be dark and then they away, and I to Sir W. Batten, where
the Lieutenant of the Tower was, and Sir
J.Mennes; and the news, I
fear, is no more [nor] less then what I had heard before. Only, that
our Blue Squadron, it seems, was pursued the most of the time,
having more ships, a great many, then its number allotted to her
share. Young Seamour is killed, the only captain slain. The
Resolution burned; but, as they say, most of her [men] and
commander saved. This is all; only, we keep the sea; which denotes
a victory, or at least that we are not beaten. But no great matters to
brag on, God knows. So home to supper and to bed.
—% AUGUST#-
5. Lords day. Up, and down to the old Swan; and there called
Betty Michell and her husband and had two or three long salutes
from her out ofsight of su marido, which pleased me mightily. And
so carried them by water to Westminster; and I to St. James’s and
there had a meeting before the Duke of York, complaining of want
of money; but nothing done to any purpose, for want we shall; so
that now our advices to him signify nothing. Here Sir W. Coventry
did acquaint the Duke of York how the world doth discourse ofthe
ill method of our books, and that we would consider how to answer
any enquiry which shall be made after our practice therein — which
will, I think, concern the Controller most. But I shall make it a
memento to myself. Thence walked to the parish church to have
one look upon Betty Michell; and so away homeward by water,
and landed.to go to the church, where I believe Mrs. Horsly goes,
by Merchant-Taylor hall. And there I find in the pulpit Elborough,
my old schoolfellow and a simple rogue; and yet I find preaching a
very good sermon, and in as right a parson-like manner, and in
647
good manner too, as Ihave heard anybody; and the church very fuil
— which is a surprizing consideration. But I did not see her. So
home, and had a good dinner; and after dinner, with my wife and
Mercer and Jane by water all the afternoon up as high as
Moreclacke, with great pleasure, and a fine day — reading over the
second part of The Siege ofRhodes with great delight. We landed and
walked at Barne elmes; and then at the neat houses I landed and
bought a Millon (and we did also land and eat and drink at
Wandsworth); and so to the Old Swan, and there walked home —it
being a mighty fine evening, cool evening; and there being come,
my wife and I spent an hour in the garden, talking of our living in
the country when I shall be turned out of the office, as I fear the
Parliament may find faults enough with the office to remove us all.
And I am joyed to think in how good a condition I am to retire
thither, and have wherewith very well to subsist. Thence home and
to bed.