1666-10-07

Lords day. Up, and after visiting my father in his chamber, to
church, and then home to dinner. Little Michell and his wife came
to dine with us — which they did; and then presently after dinner, I
with Sir
J.Mennes to Whitehall, where met by W. Batten and Lord
Brouncker, to attend the King and Duke of York at the Cabinet; but
nobody had determined what to speak of, but only in general to ask
for money — so I was forced immediately to prepare in my mind a
method of discoursing. And anon we were called in to the green
room, where the King, Duke of York, Prince Rupert, Lord
Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Duke of Albemarle, G. Carteret, W.
Coventry, Morrice. Nobody beginning, I did, and made a current
and, I thought, a good speech, laying open the ill state of the Navy —
by the greatness of the debt — greatness of work to do against next
year — the time and materials it would take — and our incapacity,
I. i.e. a salary, which he had enjoyed since September 1664.
678
7 October 1666
through a total want of money. I had no sooner done, but Prince
Rupert rose up and told the King in a heat that whatever the
gentleman had said, he had brought home his fleet in as good a
condition as ever any fleet was brought home — that twenty boats
would be as many as the fleet would want — and all the anchors and
cables left in the storm might be taken up again. This arose from my
saying, among other things we had to do, that the fleet was come in,
the greatest fleet that ever his Majesty had yet together, and that in
as bad condition as the enemy or weather could put it. And to use
Sir W. Penn’s words, who is upon the place taking a Survey, he
dreads the reports he is to receive from the Surveyorsofits defects. I
therefore did only answer that I was sorry for his Highness’s
offence, but that what I said was but the report we received from
those entrusted in the fleet to inform us. He muttered, and repeated
what he had said; and so after a long silence on all hands, nobody,
not so much as the Duke of Albemarle, seconding the Prince, nor
taking notice of what he said, we withdrew. I was not alittle
troubled at this passage; and the more, when speaking with Jacke
Fenn about it, he told me that the Prince will now be asking who
this Pepys is, and find him to be a creature of my Lord Sandwiches,
and therefore this was done only to disparage him. Anon they
broke up and Sir W. Coventry came out, so I asked his advice: he
told me he had said something to salve it, which was that his
Highnesse had, he believed, rightly informed the King that the fleet
is in good condition to have stayed out yet longer, and hath fought
the enemy; but yet that Mr. Pepys his meaning might be that
though in so good condition, if they should come in and lie all the
winter, we shall be very loath to send them to sea for another year’s
service with[out] great repairs. He said it would be no hurt if|went
to him and showed him the report himself brought up from the
fleet, where every ship, by the commander’s report, doth need
more or less — and not to mention more of Sir W. Penn for doing
him a mischief; so I said I would — but do not think that all this will
redound to my hurt, because the truth of what I said will soon
appear. Thence, having been informed that after all this pains the
King hath found out how to supply us with 5 or 6000/, when
100000! were at this time but absolutely necessary, and we
mentioned 50000! — this is every day a greater and greater omen of
Ruine — God fit us for it — Sir
J.Mennes and I home (it raining) by
coach (calling only on Sir G. Carteret at his lodging, who is, I find,
troubled at my Lord Treasurer and Sir Ph. Warwick bungling in his
679
accounts); and being come home to supper, with my father, and
then all to bed. I made my brother in his Cassocke to say grace this
day, but I like his voice so ill, that I begin to be sorry he hath taken
this order upon him.