1666-02-09

Up, and betimes to Sir Ph. Warwicke, who was glad to see me
and very kind. Thence to Coll. Norwood’s lodgings, and there set
right Houblons business about their ships. Thence to Westminster
to the Exchequer about my Tanger business, to get orders for
tallies, and so to the Hall, where the first day of the Tearme and the
hall very full of people, and much more then was expected,
considering the plague that hath been. Thence to the Change, and
to the Sun behind it to dinner with the Lieutenant of the Tower and
Coll. Norwood and others — where strange pleasure they seem to
take in their wine and meat, and discourse of it with the curiosity
and joy that methinks was below men of worth. Thence home, and
there very much angry with my people till I had put all things in
good forwardness about my supper for the Houblons; but that
581
1666 g—12 February
being done, I was in good humour again, and all things in good
order. Anon the five brothers Houblons came, and Mr. Hill, and a
very good supper we had, and good company and discourse, with
great pleasure. My new plate sets off my cupboard very nobly.
Here they were till about 11 at night, with great pleasure; anda fine
sight it is to see these five brothers thus loving one to another, and
all industrious merchants. Our subject was principally Mr. Hills
going for them to Portugall, which was the occasion of this
entertainment. They gone, we to bed.
11. Lords day. Up, and put ona new black cloth suit to an old coat
that I make to be in mourning at Court, where they are all, for the
King of Spain. To church I, and at noon dined well; and then by
water to Whitehall, carying a Captain of the Tower (who desired
his freight thither); there I to the park, and walk two or three turns
of the Pall Mall with the company about the King and Duke — the
Duke speaking to me a good deal. There met Lord Brouncker and
Mr. Coventry and discoursed about the Navy business, and all of us
much ata loss that we yet can hear nothing of Sir Jere. Smith’s fleet
that went away to the Streights the middle of December — through
all the storms that we have had since, that have driven back three or
four of them, with their masts by the board. Yesterday came out the
King’s Declaration of war against the French; but with such mild
invitations of both them and [the] Duch to come over hither, witha
promise of their protection, that everybody wonders at it. Thence
home with my Lord Brouncker for discourse sake; and thence by
hackney coach home; and so my wife and I mighty pleasant
discourse, supped, and to bed — the great wound I had Wednesday
last in my thumb having, with once dressing by Mrs. Turners
balsam, been perfectly cured, whereas I did not hope to save my
nail, whatever else trouble it did give me. My wife and I are much
thoughtful nowadays about Pall’s coming up, in order to a
husband.
12. Up, and very busy to perform an oath in finishing my
Journall
this morning for seven or eight days past. Then to several people
attending upon business; among others, Mr. Grant and the
executors of Barlow for the 25/ due for the quarter before he died;
which I scruple to pay, being obliged but to pay every half-year.
Then comes Mr. Czsar, my boy’s lute-master, whom I have not
seen since the plague before, but he hath been in Westminster all this
582
while very well — and tells me how, in the heighth of it, how bold
people there were to go in sport to one another’s burials. And in
spite to well people, would breathe in the faces (out of their
windows) of well people going by. Then to dinner before the
Change, and so to the Change and then to the tavern to talk with Sir
Wm. Warren; and so by coach to several places, among others, to
my Lord Treasurer’s, there to meet my Lord Sandwich, butmissed;
and met him at Lord Chancellors and there talked with him about
his accounts, and then about Sir G. Carteret; and I find by him that
Sir G. Carteret hath a worse game to play then my Lord Sandwich,
for people are heaving at him. And he cries out of the business of Sir
W. Coventry, who strikes at all and doth all. Then to my
bookseller’s, and then received some books Ihave new bought; and
here late, choosing some more to new bind, having resolved to give
myself rol in books. And so home to the office, and then home to
supper, where Mr. Hill was, and supped with us, and good
discourse; a excellent person he still appears to me. After supper,
and he gone, we to bed.