1666-12-30

Up and with Sir W. Batten to Whitehall, and there we did
attend the Duke of York and had much business with him. And
pretty to see (itbeing St. Andrew’s day) how some few did wear St.
Andrew’s Crosse; but most did make a mockery at it, and the
697
1666 30 November—1 December
House of Parliament, contrary to practice, did sit also — people
having no mind to observe that Scotch saint’s day till they hear
better news from Scotland. Thence to Westminster hall and the
abby, thinking, as I had appointed, to have met Mrs. Burroughs
there; but not meeting her, I home and just overtook my Cosen
Rogr. Pepys, Mrs. Turner, Dike, and Joyce Norton, coming by
invitation to dine with me —these ladies I have not seen since before
the plague. Mrs. Turner is come to town to look after her things in
her house; but all is lost. She is quite weary of the country, but
cannot get her husband to let her live here any more, which troubles
her mightily. She was mighty angry with me, that in all this time I
never writ to her; which I do think and take to myself as a fault, and
which I have promised to mend. Here I had a noble and costly
dinner for them, dressed by a man cooke, as that the other day was.
And pretty merry we were, as I could be with this company and so
great charge. We sat long; and after much talk of the plenty of her
country! in Fish, but in nothing also that is pleasing, we broke up
with great kindness; and when it begun to be dark, we parted, they
in one coach home, and I in another to Westminster hall — where by
appointment Mrs. Burroughs and I were to meet, but did not, after
I had spent the whole evening there. Only, I did go drink at the
Swan, and there did meet with Sarah, who is now newly married;
and there I did lay the beginnings of a future amor con ella, which in
time may come para laisser me hazer alguna cosa con elle. Thence, it
being late, away; called at Mrs. Burroughs mother’s door, and she
came out to me and I did hazer whatever I would con su mano
tocando mi cosa; and then parted and home; and after some playing
at cards with my wife, we to supper and to bed.
~* DECEMBER#-
1. Upand to the office, where we sat all the morning. At home to
dinner, and then abroad, walking to the Old Swan, and in my way
did see a cellar in Tower streete in a very fresh Fire, the late great
winds having blown it up; it seemed to be only of Loggwood, that
hath kept the fire all this while in it. Going further, I met my late
Lord Mayor Bludworth, under whom the City was burned, and
1. North Yorkshire:
698
went with him by water to Whitehall. But Lord, the silly talk that
this fellow had — only, how ready he would be to part with all his
estate in these difficult times to advance the King’s service, and
complaining that now (as everybody did lately in the Fire)
everybody endeavours to save himself and let the whole perish —
but a very weak man he seems to be. I left him at Whitehall, he
giving 6d. towards the boat, and I to Westminster hall, where I was
again defeated in my expectation of Burroughs — however, I was
not much sorry for it; but by coach home in the evening, calling at
Faythornes and buying three of my Lady Castlemaynes heads,
printed this day; which endeed is, as to the head, I think a very fine
picture, and like her. I did this afternoon get Mrs. Michell to let me
only havea sight of a pamphlett lately printed, but suppressed and
much called after, called The Catholiques Apology, lamenting the
severity of the Parliament against them — and comparing it with the
lenity of other princes to protestants. Giving old and late instances
of their Loyalty to their princes, whatever is objected against them.
And excusing their disquiets in Queen Elizabeths time, for that it
was impossible for them to think her a lawful queen, if Queene
Mary, who had been owned as such, were so; one being the
daughter of the true, and the other of a false wife — and that of the
Gunpowder Treason, by saying that it was only the practice of
some ofus, ifnot the King, to trapan someoftheir religion into it, it
never being defended by the generality of their Church, nor endeed
known by them. And ends witha large Catalogue in red Letters, of
the Catholiques which have lost their lives in the quarrel of the late
King and this. The thing is very well writ endeed. So home to my
letters, and then to my supper and to bed.