1666-07-04

Up, and visited very betimes by Mr. Sheply, who is come to
town upon business from Hinchingbrooke, where he left all well. I
out, and walked along with him as far as Fleetestreete, it being a
fast-day, the usual fast for the plague, and few coaches to be had.
Thanks be to God, the plague is as I hear encreased but two this
week. But in the country in several places it rages mightily, and
perticularly in Colchester, where it hath long been, and is believed
will quite depopulate the place. To St. James’s, and there did our
usual business with the Duke, all of us. Among other things,
discoursing about the places where to build ten great ships, the
King and Council have resolved on none to be under third-rates;
but it is impossible to do it — unless we have more money towards
the doing it then yet we have in any view. But however, the show
must be made to the world. Thence home and dined; and then to the
office, where busy all day. And in the evening Sir W. Pen came to
me, and we walked together and talked of the late fight. I find him
very plain that the whole conduct of the late fight was ill, and that
that of truth’s all, and he tells me that it is not he, but two-thirds of
the commanders of the whole fleet have told him so - they all saying
that they durst not oppose it at the council of war, for fear of being
called Cowards, though it was wholly against their judgment to
fight that day with that disproportion of force; and then we not
being able to use one gun of our lower tire, which was a greater
disproportion then the other. Besides, we might very well have
stayed in the Downs without fighting, or anywhere else, till the
639
Prince could have come up to them — or at least till the weather was
fair, that we might have the benefit of our whole force in the ships
that we had. He says three things must [be] remedied, or else we
shall be undone, by this fleet.
1. That we must fight ina line, whereas we fight promiscuously,
to our utter and demonstrable ruine — the Duch fighting
otherwise — and we, whenever we beat them.
2. We must not desert ships of our own in distress as we did, for
that makes a captain desperate, and will fling away his ship
when there is no hopes left him of succour.
3. That ships, when they area little shattered, must not take the
liberty to come in of themselfs; but refit themselfs the best
they can, and stay out — many of our ships coming in with
very small disablings.
He told me that our very commanders, nay, our very flag-
officers, do stand in need of exercizing among themselfs and
discoursing the business of commandingafleet — he telling me that
even one of our flagmen in the fleet did not know which Tacke lost
the wind or which kept it in the last engagement. He says it was
pure dismaying and fear that made them all run upon the Galloper,
not having their wits about them; and that it was a miracle they
were not all lost. He much inveighs upon my discoursing of Sir
John Lawson’s saying heretofore, that 60 sail would do as much as
100. And says that he was a man of no counsel at all, but had got the
confidence to say as the gallants did, and did propose to himself to
make himself great by them, and saying as they did; but was no man
ofjudgment in his business, but had been out in the greatest points
that have come before them. And then in the business of
Forecastles, which he did oppose, all the world sees now the use of
them for shelter of men. He did talk very rationally to me,
insomuch that I took more pleasure this night in hearing him
discourse then I ever did in my life in anything that he said. He
gone, I to the office again; and so after some business, home to
supper and to bed.