1666-02-26

Called up about 5 in the morning, and my Lord upp and took
coachalittle after 6, very kindly, of me and the whole company.
Then I in, and my wife up and to visit my Lady Slaning in her bed,
and there sat three hours, with Lady Jemimah with us, talking and
laughing. Here stayed till 9 a-clock almost, and then took coach,
with so much love and kindness from my Lady Carteret, Lady
Jemimah, and Lady Slaning, that it joys my heart (and when I
consider the manner of my going hither, with a coach and four
horses, and servants and a woman with us, and coming hither,
being so much made of, and used with that state, and then going to
Windsor and being shown all that we were there, and had
wherewith to give everybody something for their pains, and then
going home, and all in fine weather, and no fears nor cares upon
me, I do think myself obliged to think myself happy, and do look
upon myself at this time in the happiest occasion a man can be; and
whereas we take pains in expectation of future comfort and ease, I
have taught myself to reflect upon myself at present as happy and
enjoy myself in that consideration, and not only please myself with
thoughts of future wealth, and forget the pleasures we at present
enjoy).
So took coach and to Windsor to the guarter, and thither sent for
Dr. Childe — who came to us, and carried us to St. Georges Chapel
and there placed us among the Knights’ Stalls (and pretty the
observation, that no man, but a woman, may sit ina Knight’s place
where any brasse-plates are set). And hither comes cushions to us,
and a young singing-boy to bring us a copy of the Anthemne to be
sung. And here, for our sakes, had this anthem and the great service
sung extraordinary, only to entertain us. It is a noble place endeed,
and good Quire ofvoices. Great bowing by all the people, the poor
Knights perticularly, to the Alter. After prayers, we to see the plate
S91
of the Chapel and the Robes of Knights, and a man to show us the
banners of the several Knights in being, which hang up over the
stalls. And so to other discourse, very pretty, about that Order.
Was shown where the late [King] is buried, and King Henry the 8,
and my Lady Seymour. This being done, to the King’s house and to
observe the neatness and contrivance of the house and gates; it is the
most Romantique castle that is in the world. But Lord, the prospect
that is in the Balcone in the Queen’s lodgings, and the Tarrace and
walk, are strange things to consider, being the best in the world,
sure. Infinitely satisfied, I and my wife with all this; she being in all
points mightily pleased too, which added to my pleasure. And so
giving a great deal of money to this and that man and woman, we to
our tavern and there dined, the Doctor with us; and so took coach
and away to Eaton, the Doctor with me. At Eaton I left my wife in
the coach, and he andI to the college and there find all mighty fine.
The school good, and the custom pretty of boys cutting their names
in the shuts of the window when they go to Cambrige; by which
many a one hath lived to see himself Provost and Fellow, that had
his name in the window standing. To the hall, and there find the
boys’ verses, De peste; it being their custom to make verses at
Shrovetide. I read several, and very good they were, and better |
think then ever I made when I was a boy — and in rolls as long and
longer then the whole hall by much. Here is a picture of Venice
hung up, given, anda Monument made of Sir H. Wottons giving it,
to the College. Thence to the Porters, in the absence of the Butler,
and did drink of the College beer, which is very good, and went
into the back fields to see the scholars play. Thence took leave of the
Doctor; and so took coach, and finely, but sleepy, away home, and
got thither about 8 at night; and after a little at my office, I to bed.
And an hour after was waked with my wife’s quarrelling with
Mercer, at which I was angry, and my wife andIfell out — but with
much ado to sleep again, I beginning to practise more temper, and
to give her her way.