1666-08-15

Mighty sleepy; slept till past 8 of the clock, and was called up
by a letter from Sir W. Coventry; which, among other things, tells
me how we have burned 160 ships of the enemy within the Fly. I
up, and with all possible haste, and in pain for fear of coming late, it
being our dayof attending the Duke of York, to St. James’s, where
652
they are full of the perticulars — how they are generally good
merchant ships, some of them laden, and supposed rich ships. We
spent five fireships upon them. We landed on the Schelling (Sir Ph.
Howard with some men, and Holmes I think with others, about
1000 in all), and burned a town — and so came away. By and by the
Duke of York with his books showed us the very place and manner
—and that it was not our design or expectation to have done this, but
only to have landed on the Fly and burned some of their stores; but
being come in, we spied these ships, and with our longboats one by
one fired them, our ships running all aground, it being so shoal
water. We were led to this by, it seems, a Renegado Captain of the
Hollanders, who found himself ill-used by De Ruyter for his good
service, and so came over to us; and hath done us good service, so
that now we trust him, and he himself did go on this expedition.
The service is very great — andour joys as great for it. All is, it will
make the Duke of Albemarle in repute again I doubt — though there
be nothing of his in this. But Lord, to see what success doth,
whether with or without reason, and making a man seem wise,
notwithstanding never so late demonstration of the profoundest
folly in the world. Thence to the Exchequer, but did nothing, they
being all gone from their offices; and so to the Old Exchange,
where the town full of this good news; but I did not stay to tell or
hear any, but home, my head akeing and drowzy, and to dinner;
and then lay down upon the couch, thinking to geta little rest, but
could not. So down the River, reading The Adventures offive houres,
which the more I read the more I admire. So down below
Greenwich; but the wind and tide being against us, I back again to
Deptford and did a little business there, and thence walked to
Redriffe, and so home — and to the office a while; in the evening
comes W. Batelier and his sister and my wife and fair Mrs. Turner
into the garden, and there we walked; and then with my Lady Pen
and Pegg in a-doors, and eat and were merry; and so pretty late
broke up and to bed — the guns of the Tower going off, and there
being bonefires also in the street for this late good Successe.