1666-10-15

Called up, though a very rainy morning, by Sir H. Cholmly,
and he and I most of the morning together, evening of accounts,
which I was very glad of. Thence he and I together to Westminster
hall — in our way talking of matters and passages of state. The
viciousness of the Court. The contempt the King brings himself
into thereby. His minding nothing, but doing all things just as his
people about him will have it. The Duke of York becominga slave
to this whore Denham — and wholly minds her. That there really
was amours between the Duchesse and Sidny. That there is reason
to fear that as soon as the Parliament have raised this money, the
King will see that he hath got all that he can get, and then make up a
peace. He tells me, which I wonder at but that Ifind it confirmed by
Mr. Pierce, whom met by and by in the Hall, that Sir W. Coventry
is of the Caball with the Duke of York and Brouncker, with this
Lady Denham, which is a shame and I am sorry for it; and that Sir
W. Coventry doth make her visits. But yet Ihope it is not so. Pierce
tells me that, as little agreement as there is between the Prince and
Duke of Albemarle, yet they are likely to go to sea again — for the
first will not be trusted alone, and nobody will go with him but this
Duke of Albemarle. He tells me much, how all the commanders of
681
the fleet and officers that are sober men do cry out upon their bad
discipline, and the ruine that must fallow it if it continue. But that
which I wonder most at, it seems their secretaries have been the
most exorbitant in their fees to all sorts of people, that it is not to be
believed that they durst do it, so as it is believed they have got 80o/
apiece by the very vacancies in the fleet. He tells me that Lady
Castlemayne is concluded to be with child again. And that all the
people about the King do make no scruple of saying that the King
doth lie with Mrs. Stuart, whom he says is a most excellent-natured
lady. This day the King begins to put on his Vest,' and I did see
several persons of the House of Lords, and Commons too, great
courtiers, who are in it— being a long Cassocke close to the body, of
black cloth and pinked with white silk under it, and a coat over it,
and the legs ruffled with black riband like a pigeon’s leg — and upon
the whole, I wish the King may keep it, for it is a very fine and
handsome garment.