1666-06-06

By water to St. James’s. There we all met and did our business
as usual with the Duke; thence after the Duke into the park, walking
through to Whitehall; and there everybody listening for guns, but
none heard; and every creature is now overjoyed and conclude,
upon very good grounds, that the Duch are beaten, because we
have heard no guns nor no news of our fleet. By and by, walking a
little further, Sir Ph. Frowde did meet the Duke with an express to
Sir W. Coventry (who was by) from Capt. Taylor, the Storekeeper
627
at Harwich; being the narration of Capt. Hayward of the Dunkirke;
who gives a very serious account how upon Monday the two fleets
[were] fighting all day till 7 at night, and then the whole fleet of
Duch did betake themselfs to a very plain flight and never looked
back again. That Sir Chr. Mings is wounded in the leg. That the
Generall is well. That it is conceived reasonably that of all the Dutch
fleet, which, with what recruits they had, came to 100 sail, there is
not above 50 got home — and of them, few, if any, of their flags.
And that little Capt. Bell in one of the fireships did at the end of the
day fire a ship of 70 guns. We were all so overtaken with this good
news that the Duke ran with it to the King, who was gone to chapel;
and there all the Court was in a hubbub, being rejoiced over head
and ears in this good news. Away go I by coach to the New
Exchange and there did spread this good newsalittle, though Ifind
it had broken out before. And so home to our own church, it being
the common fast-day; and it was just before sermon, but Lord, how
all the people in the church stared upon me to see me whisper to Sir
Jo. Minnes and my Lady Pen. Anon I saw people stirring and
whispering below, and by and by comes up the Sexton from my
Lady Ford to tell me the news (which I had brought), being now
sent into the church by Sir W. Batten —-in writing,-and handed from
pew to pew. But that which pleased me as much as the news, was to
have the fair Mrs. Middleton at our church, who indeed is a very
beautiful lady. Here after sermon comes to our office 40 people
almost, of all sorts and qualities, to hear the news; which I took
great delight to tell them.