1666-06-03

Lords day. Whitsunday. Up and by water to Whitehall; and there
met with Mr. Coventry, who tells me the only news from the fleet
is brought by Capt. Elliott of the Portland, which, by being run on
board by the Guernsey, was disabled from staying abroad — so is
coming in to Albrough. That he saw one of the Duch great ships
623
1666 3 June
blown up, and three on fire. That they begun to fight on Friday.
And at his coming into port, could make another ship of the King’s
coming in, which he judged to be the Rupert. That he knows of no
other hurt to our ships. With this good news, I home by water
again, and to church in the sermon time and with great joy told it
my fellows in the pew. So home after church-time to dinner. And
after dinner my father, wife, sister, and Mercer by water to
Woolwich, while I walked by land and saw the Exchange as full of
peopie, and hath been all this noon, as of any other day, only for
news. A letter is also come this afternoon from Harman in the
Henery (which is she was taken by Elliott for the Rupert), that being
fallen into the body of the Duch fleet, he made his way through
them, was set on by three fireships, one after another — got two of
them off and disabled the third— was set on fire himself; upon which
many of his men leaped into the sea and perished; among others, the
Parson first — hath lost above 100 men and a good many wounded
(God knows what is become of Balty); and at last quenched his own
fire and got to Albrough — being, as all say, the greatest hazard that
ever any ship scaped, and as bravely managed by him. The mast of
the third fireship fell into their ship on Fire and hurt Harman’s leg,
which makes him lame now, but not dangerous. I to Sir G.
Carteret, who told me there hath been great bad management in all
this; that the King’s orders that went on Friday for calling back the
Prince, was sent but by the ordinary post on Wednesdy, and came
to the Prince his hands but on Friday. And then instead of sailing
presently, he stays till 4 in the evening; and that which is worst of all
— the Hampshire, laden with merchants money come from the
Streights, set out with or but just before the fleet and was in the
Downes by 5 of the clock yesterday morning — and the Prince with
his fleet came over to Dover but at 10 of the clock at night. This is
hard to [be] answered, if it be true. This puts great astonishment
into the King and Duke and Court, everybody being out of
countenance. So meeting Creed, he and I by coach to Hide parke
alone to talk of these things, and do bless God that my Lord
Sandwich was not here at this time — to be concerned in a business
like to be so misfortunate. It was a pleasant thing to consider how
fearful I was of being seen with Creed all this afternoon, for fear of
people’s thinking that by our relation to my Lord Sandwich we
should be making ill constructions of the Prince’s failure. But God
knows, I am heartily sorry, for the sake of the whole nation; though
if it were not for that, it would not be amisse to have these high
624
blades find some check to their presumption — and their disparaging
of so good men. Thence set him down in Common Guarden, and
so home by the Change; which is full of people still, and all talk
highly of the failure of the Prince in not making more haste after his
instructions did come, and of our managements herein, not giving
it sooner and with more care and oftener thence. After supper, to
bed.