1666-01-29

Up, and to Court by coach, where to council before the Duke
of Yorke — the Duke of Albemarle with us. And after Sir W.
Coventry had gone over his notes that he had provided with the
Duke of Albemarle, I went over all mine, with good success. Only,
I fear I did once offend the Duke of Albemarle, but I was much
joyed to find the Duke of Yorke so much contending for my
discourse about the pursers against Sir W. Penn, who opposed it
like a fool. My Lord Sandwich came in in the middle of the
business; and, poor man, very melancholy methought, and said
little at all or to the business, and sat at the lower end, just as he
comes, no room being made for him; only, Idid give him my stool,
and another was reached for me. This council done, I walked to and
again up and down the house, discoursing with this and that man.
Among others, took occasion to thank the Duke of Yorke for his
good opinion in general of my service, and perticularly his favour in
conferring on me the victualling business. He told me that he knew
nobody so fit as I for it. And next, he was very glad to find that to
give me for my encouragement — speaking very kindly of me. So to
Sir W. Coventry’s to dinner with him, whom I took occasion to
thank for his favour and good thoughts of what little service I did,
desiring he would do the last act of friendship, in telling me of my
faults also. He told me he would [be] sure he would do that also, if
there were any occasion for it. So that, as much as it is possible
under so great a fall of my Lord Sandwich’s and difference between
them, I may conclude that I am thoroughly right with Sir W.
Coventry. Idined with him witha great deal of company and much
merry discourse. I was called away before dinner ended, to go to
my company who dined at our lodgings — whither I went with Mr.
Eveling (whom I met) in his coach going that way — but found my
company gone; but my Lord Brouncker left his coach for me, so
Mr. Eveling and I into my Lord’s coach and rode together, with
excellent discourse till we came to Clapham -talking of the vanity
$78
and vices of the Court, which makes it a most contemptible thing;
and endeed, in all his discourse I find him a most worthy person.
Perticularly, he intertained me with discourse of an Infirmery
which he hath projected for the sick and wounded seamen against
the next year, which I mightily approve of — and will endeavour to
promote, it being a worthy thing — and of use and will save money.
He set me down at Mr. Gawden’s, where nobody yet come home, I
having left him and his sons and Creed at Court. So I took a book,
and into the gardens and there walked and read till dark — with great
pleasure; and then in, and in comes Osborne and he andIto talk,
and Mr. Jaggard, who came from London; and great hopes there is
of a decrease this week also of the plague. Anon comes in Creed,
and after that, Mr. Gauden and his sons — and then they bring in
three ladies who were in the house, but I do not know of them; his
daughter and two nieces, daughters of Dr. Whistlers — with whom,
and Creed, mighty sport at supper, the ladies very pretty — and
mirthful. I perceive they know Creeds gut and stomach as well as I,
and made as much mirth as I with it at supper. After supper I made
the ladies sing, and they have been taught; but Lord, though I was
forced to commend them, yet it was the saddest stuff I ever heard.
However, we sat up late; and then I, in the best chamber like a
prince, to bed — and Creede with me. And being sleepy, talked but
little.