1666-10-03

Waked betimes, mightily troubled in mind, and in the most
true trouble that I ever was in my life, saving in that business last
676
year of the East India prizes. So up, and with Mr. Hayter and W.
Hewer and Gibson to consider of our business and books and
papers necessary for this examination; and by and by, by 8 a-clock,
comes Birch the first, with the list and books of accounts delivered
in. He calls me to work, and there he and I begin; when by and by
comes Garraway, the first time I ever saw him, and Sir W.
Thomson and Mr. Boscawen. They to it, and I did make shift to
answer them better then I expected. Sir W. Batten, Lord
Brouncker, W. Penn came in, but presently went out; and J.
Mennes came in, and said two or three words from the purpose but
to do hurt; and so away he went also — and left me all the morning
with them alone, to stand or fall. At noon W. Batten comes to them
to invite them (though fast-day) to dinner — which they did, and
good company they were, but especially Garraway. Here I have
news brought me of my father’s com[ing] to town, andI presently
to him. Glad to see him, poor man, he being come unexpected to
see us and the City. I could not stay with him, but after dinner to
work again, only the committee and J, till dark night; and by that
time they cast up all the lists and found out what the medium of men
was borne all the war, of all sorts — and ended with good peace and
much seeming satisfaction; but I find them wise and reserved, and
instructed to hit all our blots—as, among others, that we reckon the
ships full manned from the beginning. They gone, and my heart
eased of a great deal of fear and pain, and reckoning myself to come
offwith victory, because not overcome in anything or much foiled,
I away to Sir W. Coventry’s chamber, but he not within; then to
Whitehall and there among the ladies, and saw my Lady Castle-
maine never looked so ill, nor Mrs. Stewart neither, as in this plain
natural dress; I was not pleased with either of them. Away, not
finding W. Coventry; and so home, and there find my father and
my brother come to town - my father without my expectation; but
glad 1am to see him. And so to supper with him, and to work again
at the office; then home to set up all my Folio books, which are
come home gilt on the backs, very handsome to the eye; and then at
midnight to bed.