1666-02-14

St. Valentine’s day. This morning called up by Mr. Hill, who
my wife thought had been come to be her Valentine, she it seems
having drawn him last night, but it proved not; however, calling
him up to our bedside, my wife challenged him. I up and made
583
myself ready, and so with him by coach to my Lord Sandwiches by
appointment — to deliver Mr. How’s accounts to my Lord. Which
done, my Lord did give me hearty and large studied thanks for all
my kindnesses to him and care of him and his business. I, after
profession of all duty to his Lordshipp, took occasion to bemoan
myself that I should fall into sucha difficulty about Sir G. Carteret,
as not to be for him but I must be against Sir W. Coventry, and
therefore desired to be neutrall — which my Lord approved and
confessed reasonable, but desired me to befriend him privately.
Having done in private with my Lord, Ibrought Mr. Hill to kiss his
hands, to whom my Lord professed great respects upon my score.
My Lord being gone, I took Mr. Hill to my Lord Chancellors new
house that is building, and went with trouble up to the top of it and
there is there the noblest prospect that ever I saw in my life,
Greenwich being nothing to it. And in everything 1s a beautiful
house — and most strongly built in every respect — and as if, as it
hath, it had the Chancellor for its maister. Thence with him to his
painter, Mr. Hales, who is drawing his picture — which will be
mighty like him, and pleased me, so that I am resolved presently to
have my wife’s and mine done by him, he having a very maisterly
hand. So with mighty satisfaction to the Change, and thence home;
and after dinner abroad, taking Mrs. Mary Batelier with us, who
was Just come to see my wife; and they set me down at my Lord
Treasurer’s, and themselfs went with the coach into the fields to
take the ayre. I stayed a meeting of the Duke of Yorkes and the
officers of the Navy and Ordinance — my Lord Treasurer lying in
bed of the gowte. Our business was discourse of the straits of the
Navy for want of money; but after long discourse, as much out of
order as ordinary people’s, we came to no issue, nor any money
promised or like to be had, and yet the work must be done. Here I
perceive Sir G. Carteret had prepared himself to answer a Choque
of Sir W. Coventry, by offering of himself
to show all he had paid,
and what 1s unpaid and what moneys and assignments he hath in his
hands — which, ifhe makes good, was the best thing he ever did say
in his life — and the best timed, for else it must have fallen very foul
on him.