1666-01-12

By coachto the Duke of Albemarle, where Sir W. Batten and1
1. See above, p. 159 (10 October) & n.
2. cf. above, p. $61 (9 December).
$72
12 January 1666
only met. Troubled at my heart to see how things are ordered there
— without consideration or understanding. Thence back by coach,
and called at Wottons my shoemaker, lately come to town, and
bespoke shoes; as also got him to find mea Taylor to make me some
clothes, my own being not yet in Towne, nor Pym, my Lord
Sandwiches tailor. So he helped me to a pretty man, one Mr.
Penny, against St. Dunstan’s Church. Thence to the Change, and
there met Mr. Moore, newly come to town, and took him home to
dinner with me; and after dinner to talk — and he and I do conclude
my Lord’s case to be very bad, and may be worse if he do not get a
pardon for his doings about the prizes, and his business at Bergen
and other thing[s] done by him at sea, before he goes for Spayne.
Having done discourse with him, and directed him to go with my
advice to my Lord express tomorrow to get his pardon perfected
before his going, because of what I read the other night in Sir W.
Coventry’s letters, I to the office and there had an extraordinary
meeting of Sir
J.Mennes, Sir W. Batten, Sir W. Penn, and my Lord
Brouncker and I, to hear my paper read about pursers, which they
did all of them, with great good will and great approbation of my
method and pains in all; only Sir W. Penn, who must except against
everything and remedy nothing, did except against my proposal,
for some reasons which I could not understand, I confess, nor my
Lord Brouncker neither. But he did detect, endeed, a failure or two
of mine in my report about the ill condition of the present pursers,
which I did magnify in one or two little things; to which I think he
did with reason except. But at last, with all respect did declare the
best thing he ever heard of this kind; but when Sir W. Batten did
say, ‘‘Let us that do know the practical part of the Victualling meet
Sir
J.Mennes, Sir W. Penn and I, and see what we can do to mend
all,”’ he was so far from offering or furthering it, that he declined it
and said he must be out of town. So, as I ever knew him, never did
in his life ever attempt to mend anything, but suffer all things to go
on in the way they are, though never so bad, rather then improve
his experience to the King’s advantage. So we broke up; however,
they promising to meet to offer something in it of their opinions —
and so we ris; and I and my Lord Brouncker by coachalittle way, I
with him for discourse sake — till our coach broke and tumbled me
over him quite down the side of the coach, falling on the ground
about the Stockes. But up again, and thinking it fit to have for my
honour something reported in writing to the Duke in favour of my
pains in this, lest it should be thought to be rejected as Frivolous, I
S73
did move it to my Lord, and he will see it done tomorrow. So we
parted; andI to the office, and thence home to my poor wife, who
works all day at home like a horse at the making of her hangings for
our chamber and the bed. So to supper and to bed.