1666-01-24

Greate Storme. By agreement, my Lord Brouncker called me
up; and though it was a very foul windy and rainy morning, yet
down to the waterside we went, but no boat could go, the storm
continued so. So my Lord, to stay till fairer weather, carried me
into the Tower to Mr. Hores, and there we stayed talking an hour;
1. Tom Edwards.
S75
but at last we found no boat yet could go, so we to the office, where
we met upon an occasion extraordinary, of examining abuses of our
clerks in taking money for examining of tickets, but nothing done
in it. Thence my Lord and I, the weather beingalittle fairer, by
water to Detford to Sir G. Carteret’s house, where W. How met us;
and there we opened the chests and saw the poor sorry Rubys which
have caused all this ado to the undoing of W. How;' though I am
not much sorry for it, because ofhis pride and ill-nature. About 200
of these very small stones and a cod of Muske (which it is strange I
was not able to smell) is all we could find. So locked them up again,
and my Lord and IJ, the wind being again very furious, so as we
durst not go by water, walked to London quite round the Bridge,
no boat being able to Stirre; and Lord, what a dirty walk we had,
and so strong the wind, that in the fields we many times could not
carry our bodies against it, but was driven backward. We went
through Horsydowne, where I never was since a little boy, that I
went to enquire after my father, whom we did give over for lost,
coming from Holland. It was dangerous to walk the streets, the
bricks and tiles falling from the houses, that the whole streets were
covered in them — and whole chimneys, nay, whole houses in two
or three places, blowed down. But above all, the pales on London
bridge on both sides were blown away, so that we were fain to
stoop very low, for fear of blowing off of the bridge. We could see
no boats in the Thames afloat but what were broke loose and carried
through the bridge, it being ebbing water. And the greatest sight of
all was, among other parcels of ships driven here and there in
clusters together, one was quite overset, and lay with her masts all
along in the water and keel above water. So walked home; my Lord
away to his house and I to dinner, Mr. Creede being come to town
and to dine with me, though now it was 3 a-clock. After dinner, he
and I to our accounts; and very troublesome he is and with tricks,
which I found plainly and was vexed at.