1666-06-13

With Balty to Hales’s by coach (itbeing the seventh day from
1. Rupert’s squadron had been sent westwards on receipt of false intelligence that a
French fleet was sailing up-Channel.
630
13 June 1666
my making my last oaths, and by them I am at liberty to dispense
with any of my oaths every seventh day, after I had for the six days
before-going performed all my vows). Here I find my father’s
picture begun; and so much to my content, that it joys my very
heart to think that I should have his picture so well done — who,
besides that he is my father, and a man that loves me and hath ever
done so —is also at this day one of the most careful and innocent men
in the world. Thence with mighty content homeward; and in my
way, at the Stockes, did buy a couple of lobsters, and so home to
dinner. Where I find my wife and father had dined, and were going
out to Hales’s to sit there. So Balty and I alone to dinner; and in the
middle of my grace, praying for a blessing upon (these his good
creatures), my mind fell upon my Lobsters — upon whichIcried,
“Cuds zookes!”” And Balty looked upon me like a man at a loss
what I meant, thinking at first that I meant only that I had said the
grace after meat, instead of that before meat; but then I cried, ‘“‘What
is become of my lobsters?”’, whereupon he run out of doors to
overtake the coach, but could not, and so came back again, and
mighty merry at dinner to think of my Surprize. After dinner to the
Excize office by appointment, thence home, and put off Balty; and
so (being invited) to Sir Chr. Mings’s Funerall, but find them gone
to church. However, I into the church (which is a fair large church,
and a great Chappell), and there heard the service and stayed till
they buried him, and then out. And there met with Sir W.
Coventry (who was there out of great generosity, and no person of
quality there but he) and went with him into his Coach; and being in
it with him, there happened this extraordinary case — one of the
most Romantique that ever Iheard of in my life, and could not have
believed but that I did see it — which was this.
About a Dozen able, lusty, proper men came to the coach-side
with tears in their eyes, and one of them, that spoke for the rest,
begun and says to Sir W. Coventry — “We are here a Dozen of us
that have long known and loved and served our dead commander,
Sir Chr. Mings, and have now done the last office of laying him in
the ground. We would be glad we had any other to offer after him,
and in revenge of him — all we have is our lives. If you will please to
get his Royal Highness to give us a Fireshipp among us all, here is a
Dozen of us, out of all which choose you one to be commander, and
the rest ofus, whoever he is, will serve him, and, if possible, do that
that shall show our memory of our dead commander and our
revenge.”’ Sir W. Coventry was herewith much moved (as well as I,
631
who could hardly abstain from weeping) and took their names; and
so parted, telling me that he would move his Royal Highness as in a
thing very extraordinary, and so we parted. The truth is, Sir Chr.
Mings was a very stout man, and a man of great parts and most
excellent tongue among ordinary men; and as Sir W. Coventry
says, could have been the most useful man in the world at such a
pinch of time as this. He was come into great renowne here at
home, and more abroad, in the West Indys. He had brought his
family into a way of being great. But dying at this time, his
memory and name (his father being always, and at this day, a
Shoomaker, and his mother a Hoymans daughter, of which he was
used frequently to boast) will be quite forgot in a few months, as if
he had never been, nor any of his name be the better by it — he
having not had time to coll[ect] any estate; but is dead poor rather
then rich. So we left the church and crowd, and I home (being set
down on Tower hill) and there dida little business, and then in the
evening went down by water to Deptford, it being very late. And
there I stayed out as much time as I could and then took boat again
homeward. But the officers being gone in, returned and walked to
Mrs. Bagwell’s house; and there (it being by this time pretty dark
and past 10 a-clock) went into her house and did what I would. So
away to the waterside and sent for a pint of sack, and so home,
drank what I would and gave the waterman the rest, and so adieu.
Home about 12 at night, and so to bed — finding most of my people
gone to bed. In my way homeIcalled ona fisherman and bought
three Eeles, which cost me 3s.