1666-08-14

Thankesgiving day. Up, and comes Mr. Foly and his man with
a box of great variety of Carpenters and Joyners tooles which I had
bespoke, to me, which please me mightily, but I will have more.
Then I abroad down to the Old Swan, and there I called and kissed
Betty Michell and would have got her to go with me to
Westminster, but I find her a little colder then she used to be
methought, which dida little molest me. So I away, not pleased,
and to Whitehall, to the chapel, and heard a piece of the Dean of
Westminsters sermon anda special good Anthemne before the king
after sermon. And then home by coach with Capt. Cocke — who is
in pain about his Hemp, of which he says he hath bought great
651
quantities, and would gladly be upon good terms with us for it —
wherein I promise to assist him. So we light at the Change, where
after a small turn or two, taking no pleasure nowadays to be there,
because of answering questions that would be asked there which I
cannot answer. So home and dined. And after dinner with my wife
and Mercer to the Beare garden, where I have not been | think of
many years, and saw some good sport of the bull’s tossing of the
dogs — one into the very boxes. But it is a very rude and nasty
pleasure. We had a great many hectors in the same box with us (and
one, very fine, went into the pit and played his dog for a wager,
which was a
strange sport for a gentleman), where they drank wine,
and drank ‘Mercer’s health first, which I pledged with my hat off.
And who should be in the house but Mr. Pierce the surgeon, who
saw us and spoke to us.
Thence home, well enough satisfied however with the variety of
this afternoon’s exercise; and so I to my chamber, till in the evening
our company came to supper we had invited to a venison pasty —
Mr. Batelier and his sister Mary, Mrs. Mercer —her daughter Anne,
Mr. Le Brun, and W. Hewers. And so we supped, and very merry.
And then about 9 a-clock, to Mrs. Mercers gate, where the fire and
boys expected us and her son had provided abundance of Serpents
and rockets; and there mighty merry (my Lady Pen and Pegg going
thither with us and Nan Wright) till about 12 at night, flinging our
fireworks and burning one another and the people over the way.
And at last, our businesses being most spent — we into Mrs.
Mercers, and there mighty merry, smutting one another with
Candlegresse and soot, till most of us were like devils; and that-
being done, then we broke up and to my house, and there I made
them drink; and upstairs we went, and then fell into dancing
(W.Batelier dancing well) and dressing, him and I and one Mr.
Banister (who with his wife came over also with us) like women;
and Mercer put ona suit of Toms, like a boy, and mighty mirth we
had, and Mercer danced a Jigg, and Nan Wright and my wife and
Pegg Pen put on periwigs. Thus we spent till 3 or 4 in the morning,
mighty merry; and then parted and to bed.