1666-09-03

About 4 a-clock in the morning, my Lady Batten sent mea cart
to carry away all my money and plate and best things to Sir W.
Riders at Bednall greene; which I did, riding myself in my
nightgown in the Cart; and Lord, to see how the streets and the
highways are crowded with people, running and riding and getting
of carts at any rate to fetch away thing[s]. I find Sir W. Rider tired
with being called up all night and receiving things from several
friends. His house full of goods — and muchofSir W. Batten and Sir
W. Penn’s. I am eased at my heart to have my treasure so well
secured. Then home with much ado to find a way. Nor any sleep all
this night to me nor my poor wife. But then, and all this day, she
and I and all my people labouring to get away the rest of our things,
and did get Mr. Tooker to get me a lighter to take them in, and we
did carry them (myself some) over Tower hill, which was by this
time full of people’s goods, bringing their goods thither. And down
to the lighter, which lay at the next quay above the Tower dock.
And there was my neighbour’s wife, Mrs. [Buckworth], with her
pretty child and some fewofher things, which I did willingly give
way to be saved with mine. But there was no passing with anything
through the postern, the crowd was so great. The Duke of York
came this day by the office and spoke to us, and did ride with his
guard up and down the City to keep all quiet (he being now
General, and having the care of all). This day, Mercer being not at
home, but against her mistress order gone to her mother’s, and my
wife going thither to speak with W. Hewer, met her there and was
angry; and her mother saying that she was nota prentice girl, to ask
leave every time she goes abroad, my wife with good reason was
angry, and when she came home, bid her be gone again. And so she
went away, which troubled me; but yet less then it would, because
of the condition we are in fear of coming into inalittle time, of
being less able to keep one in her quality. At night, lay down alittle
upon a quilt of W.-Hewer in the office (all my own things being
packed up or gone); and after me, my poor wife did the like — we
having fed upon the remains of yesterday’s dinner, having no fire
nor dishes, nor any opportunity of dressing anything.