1666-11-04

Lords day. Comes my Taylors man in the morning and brings
my vest home, and coat to wear with it, and belt and silver-hilted
sword. So] rose and dressed myself, and Ilike myself mightily in it,
and so doth my wife. Then being dressed, to church; and after
church pulled my Lady Pen and Mrs. Markeham into my house to
dinner; and Sir
J.Mennes, he got Mrs. Pegg along with him. Ihada
good dinner for them, and very merry. And after dinner to the
waterside, and so, it being very cold, to Whitehall, and was mighty
fearful of an ague (my vest being new and thin, and the Coate cut
not to meet before upon my breast). Here I waited in the gallery till
the Council was up; and among others, did speak with Mr.
Cooling, my Lord Chamberlain’s secretary — who tells me my
Lord-Generall is become mighty low in all people’s opinion, and
that he hath received several slurs from the King and Duke of York.
That people at Court do see the difference between his and the
Prince’s management and my Lord Sandwiches. That this business
which he is put upon, of crying out against the Catholiques and
turning them out of all imployment, will undo him when he comes
to turn out the officers out of the army — and this is a thing of his
own seeking. That he is grown a drunken sot, and drinks with
nobody but Troutbecke, whom nobody else will keep company
with — of whom he told me this story: That once, the Duke of
687
Albemarle in his drink taking notice as of a wonder that Nan Hide
should ever come to be Duchess of Yorke — “Nay,”’ says
Troutbecke, ‘“‘ne’er wonder at that; for if you will give me another
bottle of wine, Iwill tell you as great, ifnot greater, a miracle.”” And
what was that but that ““Our Dirty Besse” (meaning his Duchesse)
should come to be Duchesse of Albemarle. Here we parted, and
then by water (landing in Southwarke) home to the Tower; and so
home, and there begun to read Potters discourse upon 666, which
pleases me mightily; and then broke off, and to supper and to bed.
5s. To my Lord Crews, and there dined and mightily made of,
having not, to my shame, been there in eight months before. Here
my Lord and Sir Tho. Crew, Mr. John, and Dr. Crew — and two
strangers. The best family in the world for goodness and sobriety.
Here, beyond my expectation, I met my Lord Hinchingbrooke,
who is come to town two days since from Hinchingbrooke, and
brought his sister and brother Carteret with him — who are at Sir G.
Carteret’s. After dinner Iand Sir Tho. Crew went aside to discourse
of public matters, and do find by him that all the country gentlemen
are publicly jealous of the Courtiers in the Parliament, and that they
do doubt everything that they propose. And that the true reason
why the country-gentleman is for a land Tax and against a general
Excize, is because they are fearful that if the latter be granted, they
shall never get it down again; whereas the land tax will be but for so
much, and when the war ceases there will be no ground got by the
Court to keep it up. He doth much cry out upon our accounts, and
that all that they have had from the King hath been but Estimates,
both from my Lord Treasurer and us, and from all people else — so
that the Parliament is weary of it. He says the House would be very
glad to get something against Sir G. Carteret, and will not let their
enquiries die till they have got something. He doth, from what he
hath heard at the Committee for examining the burningofthe City,
conclude it as a thing certain, that it was done by plot — it being
proved by many witnesses that endeavours were made in several
places to encrease the fire, and that both in city and country it was
bragged by several papists that upon sucha day or in sucha time we
should find the hottest weather that ever was in England, and
words of plainer sense.