1666-06-30

Up, and to my office, there to settle some businesses in order
to our waiting on the Duke today. That done, to Whitehall to Sir
W. Coventry’s chamber, where I find the Duke gone out with the
King today on hunting. So after some discourse with him, I by
water to Westminster and there drew a draught of an order for my
Lord Treasurer to sign, for my having some little tallies made me in
lieu of two great ones of 2000! each, to enable me to pay small sums
therewith. I showed it to Sir R. Long and had his approbation, and
so to Sir Ph. Warwicke’s and did give it him to get signed. So home
to my office, and there did business. By and by, towards noon,
word is brought me that my father and sister are come — I expected
them today, but not so soon. I to them, and am heartily glad to see
them, especially my father, who, poor man, looks very well, and
hath rode up this journey on horseback very well — only, his
eyesight and hearing is very bad. I stayed and dined with them, my
1. On 11 February 1660.
621
1666 30 May-2 June
wife being gone by coach to Barnitt with W. Hewer and Mercer to
meet them, and they did come Ware way.
31. Waked very betimes in the morning by extraordinary
Thunder and rain, which did keep me sleeping and waking till very
late; and it being a holiday, and my eye very sore, and myself
having had very little sleep for a good while till 9 a-clock — and so
up, and so saw all my family up, and my father and sister (who is a
pretty good-bodied woman and not over-thicke, as I thought she
would have been; but full of Freckles and not handsome in face);
and so I out by water among the ships, and to Deptford and
Blackewall about business; and so home and to dinner with my
father and,sister and family, mighty pleasant all of us — and among
other things, with a Sparrow that our Mercer hath brought up now
for three weeks, which is so tame, that [it] flies up and down and
upon the table and eats and pecks, and doth everything so
pleasantly, that we are mightily pleased with it. To my accounts
and settled them clear; but to my grief, find myself poorer then I
was the last by near 20/ — by reason of my being forced to return sol
to Downing the smith which he had presented me with. However,
Iam well contented, finding myself yet to be worth 5200.
Thus ends this month, with my mind oppressed by my defect in
my duty of the victualling, which lies upon me as a burden till I get
myself into a better posture therein, and hinders me and casts down
my courage in everything else that belongs to me—and the jealousy
[have of Sir W. Coventry’s being displeased with me about it. But I
hope in a little time to remedy all. As to public business: by late
tidings of the French Fleete being come to Rochell (how true,
though, Iknow not), our fleet is Divided; Prince Rupert being gone
with about 30 ships to the Westward; as is conceived, to meet the
French, to hinder their coming to join with the Duch. My Lord
Duke of Albemarle lies in the Downes with the rest, and intends
presently to sail to the Gunfleete.
—% JUNE4-
2. Up, and to the office, where certain news is brought usof a
letter come to the King this morning from the Duke of Albemarle,
dated yesterday at 11 a-clock as they were sailing to the Gunfleet,
622
that they were in sight of the Duch Fleete and were fitting themselfs
to fight them — so that they are, ere this, certainly engaged; besides,
several do averr they heard the guns all yesterday in the afternoon.
This put us at the board into a Tosse. Presently comes orders for our
sending away to the fleet a recruite of 200 soldiers. So I rose from
the table, and to the Victualling Office and thence upon the river
among several vessels, to consider of the sending them away; and
lastly down to Greenwich and there appointed two Yachts to be
ready for them — and did order the soldiers to march to Blackewall.
Having set all things in order against the next Flood, I went on
shore with Capt. Erwin at Greenwich and into the parke and there
we could hear the guns from the Fleete most plainly. Thence he and
Ito the King’s head and there bespokea dish of steaks for our dinner
about 4 a-clock. While that was doing, we walked to the waterside,
and there seeing the King and Duke come down in their barge to
Greenwich house, I to them and did give them an account what I
was doing. They went up to the park to hear the guns of the fleet go
off. All our hopes now is that Prince Rupert with his fleet is coming
back and will be with the fleet this noon — a message being sent to
him to that purpose on Wednesday last. And a return is come from
him this morning, that he did intend to sail from St. Ellens point
about 4 in the afternoon on Wednesday, which was yesterday;
which gives us great hopes, the wind being very fair, that he is with
them this noon; and the fresh going-off of the guns makes us believe
the same. After dinner, having nothing else to do till flood, I went
and saw Mrs. Daniel — to whom I
did not tell that the fleets were
engaged, because of her husband, who is in the Royal Charles. Very
pleasant with her half an hour, and so away, and down to
Blackewall and there saw the soldiers (who were by this time gotten
most of them drunk) shipped off. But Lord, to see how the poor
fellows kissed their wifes and sweethearts in that simple manner at
their going off, and shouted and let off their guns, was strange
sport. Having put the soldiers on board, I home and wrote what I
had to write by the post; and so home to supper and to bed, it being
late: