1666-01-09

Up, and then to the office, where we met first since the plague,
which God preserve us in. At noon home to dinner, where Uncle
Tho. with me, and in comes Pierce, lately come from Oxford, and
Ferrers. After dinner Pierce and I up to my chamber, where he tells
me how a great difference hath been between the Duke and
Duchesse, he suspecting her to be naught with Mr. Sidny — but
$70
some way or other the matter is made up; but he was banished the
Court, and the Duke for many days did not speak to the Duchesse at
all. He tells me that my Lord Sandwich is lost there at Court,
though the King is perticularly his friend. But people do speak
everywhere slightly of him. Which isa sad story to me, but Ihope it
may be better again. And that Sir G. Carteret is neglected, and hath
great enemies at work against him. That matters must needs go bad
while all the town and every boy in the street openly cries the King
cannot go away till my Lady Castlemayne be ready to come along
with him, she being lately brought to bed. And that he visits her and
Mrs. Stewart every morning before he eats his breakfast. All this
put together makes me very sad; but yet Ihope Ishall do pretty well
among them for all this, by my not meddling with either of their
matters. And then comes Mr. Gawden, and he and I talked above-
stairs together a good while about his business; and to my great joy,
got him to declare that of the sool he did give me the other day,
none of it was for my Treasurershipp for Tanger — (I first telling
him how matters stood between Povy and I, that he was to have
half of whatever was coming to me by that office); and that he will
gratify me at two per cent for that when he next receives any money
—so there is 80/ due to me more then I thought of. He gone, I witha
glad heart to the office to write my letters; and so home to supper
and bed. My wife mighty full of her work she hath today in
furnishing her bedchamber.
to. Up, and by coach to Sir G. Downing, where Mr. Gawden
met me by agreement to talk upon the Act. I do find Sir G.
Downing to be a mighty talker, more then is true; which I now
know to be so, and suspected it before; but for all that, Ihave good
grounds to think it will succeed for goods, and in time for money
too; but not presently. Having done with him, I to my Lord
Brunckers house in Covent Guarden; and among other things, it
was to acquaint him with my paper of pursers; and read it to him
and had his good liking of it. Showed him Mr. Coventry’s sense of
it, which he sent me last post, much to my satisfaction. Thence to
the Change, and there hear, to our grief, how the plague is
encreased this week from 70 to 89. We have also great fear of our
Hambrough fleet, of their meeting the Dutch; as also have certain
news that by storms Sir Jer. Smith’s fleet is scattered, and three of
them come without masts back to Plymouth; which is another very
exceeding great disappointment, and if the victualling ships are
S71
miscarried, will tend to the loss of the garrison of Tanger. Thence
home; in my way, had the opportunity I longed for, of seeing and
saluting Mrs. Stokes, my little goldsmiths wife in Paternoster row;
and there bespoke something, a silver chafing-dish for warming
plates. And so home to dinner. Found my wife busy about making
her hangings for her chamber with the Upholster. SoI to the office,
and anon to the Duke of Albemarle by coach at night (taking, for
saving time, Sir W. Warren with me, talking of our businesses all
the way going and coming) and there got his reference of my
pursers’ paper to the Board, to consider ofitbefore he read it, for he
will never understand it I am sure. Here I saw Sir W. Coventry’s
kind letter to him concerning my paper. And among other of his
letters (which I see all, and that is a strange thing, that whatever 1s
writ to this Duke of Albemarle, all the world may see; for this very
night he did give me Mr. Coventry’s letter to read as soon as it came
to his hand, before he had read it himself, and bid me take out of it
what concerned the Navy; and many things there was in it which I
should not have thought fit for him to have let anybody so suddenly
see). But among other things, find him profess himself to the Duke
a friend into the enquiring further into the business of Prizes,’ and
advises that it may be public, for the righting the King and
satisfying the people and getting the blame to be rightly laid where
it should be — which strikes very hard upon my Lord Sandwich —
and troubles me to read it. Besides, what vexed me more, I heard
the damned Duchesse again say,”
to twenty gentlemen publicly in
the room, that she would have Mountagu sent once more to sea,
before he goes his Embassy, that we may see whether he will make
amends for his cowardize, and repeated the answer she did give the
other day in my hearing to Sir G. Downing — wishing her Lord had
been a coward, for then perhaps he might have been made an
Embassador and not been sent now to sea. But one good thing she
said — she cried mightily out against the having of gentlemen
Captains with feathers and ribbands, and wished the King would
send her husband to sea with the old plain sea-Captains that he
served with formerly, that would make their ships swim with
blood, though they could not make legs as captains nowadays can.