1666-04-31

All the morning at the office busy. At noon to dinner, and
thence to the office and did my business there as soon as I could, and
then home and to my accounts, where very late at them. But Lord,
what a deal of do I have to understand any part of them. And in
short, do what I could, I could not come to an understanding of
them; but after Ihad thoroughly wearied myself, I was forced to go
to bed and leave them, much against my will, and vow too; but I
hope God will forgive me in it, for Ihave sat up these four nights till
1. Jane Birch.
602
31 March—6 April 1666
past 12 at night to master them, but cannot. Thus ends this month-—
with my head and mind mightily full and disquiet because of my
accounts, which I have let go too long and confounded my public
with my private, that I cannot come to any liquidating of them.
However, I do see that I must be grown richer then I was by a good
deal the last month. Busy also Iam in thoughts for a husband for my
sister; and to that end, my wife and I have determined that she shall
presently go into the country to my father and mother, and
consider of a proffer made them for her in the country; which, ifshe
likes, shall go forward.
—%APRILL3-
1. Lords day. Up and abroad, and by coach to Charing cross to
wait on Sir Ph. Howard— whom I found in bed, and he doth receive
me very civilly. My request was about suffering my wife’s brother
to go to sea, and to save his pay in the Duke’s guards — which, after a
little difficulty, he did with great respect agree to. I find him a very
fine-spoken gentleman, and one of great parts — and very cour-
teous. Much pleased with this visit, I to Whitehall, where I met Sir
G. Downing; and to discourse with him an hour about the
Exchequer payments upon the late act, and informed myself of him
thoroughly in my safety in lending 2000! to Sir W. Warren upon an
order of his upon the Exchequer for 2602! — and I do purpose to do
it. Thence, meeting Dr. Allen the physician, he and I and another
walked in the park, a most pleasant warm day, and to the Queen’s
chapel — where I do not so dislike the music. Here I saw ona post an
invitation to all good Catholics to pray for the soul of such a one,
departed this life.
6. Up mighty betimes, upon my wife’s going this day toward
Brampton. I could not go to the coach with her, but W. Hewers
did, and hath leave from me to go the whole day’s journey with her.
All the morning upon business at the office, and at noon dined; and
Mrs. Hunt coming, lent her s/ on her occasions, and so carried her
to axe yard end at Westminster and there left her — a good and
understanding woman, and her husband, I perceive, thrives
mightily in his business of the Excise. Thence to Mr. Hales, and
there sat and my picture almost finished; which, by the word of Mr.
603
and Mrs. Pierce (who came in accidentally), is mighty like, and] am
sure I am mightily pleased, both in the thing and the posture.
Thence with them homealittle, and so to Whitehall and there met
by agreement with Sir St. Fox and Mr. Ashburnham, and
discoursed the business of our Excize tallies — the former being
Treasurer of the guards, and the other Cofferer of the King’s
household — I benefited much by their discourse. We came to no
great conclusion upon our discourse; but parted, and Ihome, where
all things methinks melancholy in the absence of my wife. This day
great news of the Swedes declaring for us against the Dutch; and so
far as that, I believe it.’ After a little supper, to bed.