1666-01-31

Lords day. All the morning in my chamber, writing fair the
564
31 December 1665
state of my Tanger accounts, and so dined at home. In the afternoon
to the Duke of Albemarle, and thence back again by water, and so
to my chamber to finish the entry of my accounts and to think of the
business I am next to do, which is the stating my thoughts and
putting in order my collections about the business of Pursers, to see
where the fault of our present constitution relating to them lies, and
what to propose to mend it. And upon this late, and, with my head
full of this business, to bed.
Thus ends this year, to my great joy, in this manner: — I have
raised my estate from 1300! in this year to 44001. I have got myself
greater interest, I think, by my diligence; and my imployments
encreased by that of Treasurer for Tanger and Surveyor of the
Victuals. It is true we have gone through great melancholy because
of the great plague, and I put to great charges by it, by keeping my
family long at Woolwich, and myself and another part of my
family, my clerks, at my charge at Greenwich, and a maid at
London. But Ihope the King will give us some satisfaction for that.
But now the plague is abated almost to nothing, and I entending to
get to London as fast as I can, my family, that is, my wife and
maids, having been there these two or three weeks. The Duch war
goes on very ill, by reason of lack of money; having none to hope
for, all being put into disorder by a new Act that is made as an
experiment to bring Credit to the Exchequer, for goods and money
to be advanced upon the credit of that Act. I have never lived so
merrily (besides that Inever got so much) as I have done this plague
time, by my Lord Brouncker’s and Capt. Cocke’s good company,
and the acquaintance of Mrs. Knipp, Coleman and her husband,
and Mr. Laneare; and great store of dancings we have had at my cost
(which I was willing to indulge myself and wife) at my lodgings.
The great evil of this year, and the only one endeed, is the fall of my
Lord of Sandwich, whose mistake about the Prizes hath undone
him, I believe, as to interest at Court; though sent (for a little
palliateing it) Imbassador into Spayne, which he is now fitting
himself for. But the Duke of Albemarle goes with the Prince to sea
this next year, and my Lord very meanly spoken of; and endeed, his
miscarriage about the prize goods is not to be excused, to suffer a
company of rogues to go away with ten times as much as himself,
and the blame of all to be deservedly laid upon him. My whole
family hath been well all this while, and all my friends I know of,
saving my aunt Bell, who is dead, and some children of my Cosen
Sarah’s, of the plague. But many of such as I know very well, dead.
565
1665 31 December
Yet to our great joy, the town fills apace, and shops begin to be
open again. Pray God continue the plague’s decrease — for that
keeps the Court away from the place of business, and so all goes to
wrack as to public matters, they at this distance not thinking of it.
566
ah
-eeey
ge 1666
Eby
Tha
~%&
JANUARY #-
1. New yeare’s Day. Called up by 5 a-clock by my order by Mr.
Tooker, who wrote, while I dictated to him, my business of the
Pursers, and so without eating or drinking till 3 in the afternoon,
and then to my great content finished it. So to dinner, Gibson and
he and I — and then to Copying it over, Mr. Gibson reading and |
writing, and went a good way in it till interrupted by Sir W.
Warren’s coming, of whom I alway learn something or other, his
discourse being very good, and his brains also. He being gone, we
to our business again, and wrote more of it fair; and then late to bed.
2. Up by candlelight again, and wrote the greatest part of my
business fair; and then to the office, and so home to dinner, and
after dinner up and made an end of my fair-writing it. And that
being done, set [?my clerks] to entering, while I to my Lord
Bruncker’s; and there find Sir
J.Mennes and all his company, and
Mr. Boreman and Mrs. Turner, but above all, my dear Mrs.
Knipp, with whomI sang; and in perfect pleasure I was to hear her
sing, and especially her little Scotch song of Barbary Allen. And to
make our mirth the completer, Sir Jo. Minnes was in the highest
pitch of mirth, and his Mimicall tricks, that ever I saw; and most
excellent pleasant company he is, and the best Mimique that ever I
saw, and certainly would have made an excellent Actor, and now
would be an excellent teacher of Actors. Thence, it being post-
night, against my will took leave; but before I came to my office,
longing for more ef her company, returned and met them coming
home in coaches; so I got into the coach where Mrs. Knipp was,
and got her upon my knee (the coach being full) and played with
her breasts and sung; and at last set her at her house, and so good-
night. So home to my lodgings, and there endeavoured to have
finished the examining my paper of Pursers business to have sent
away tonight; but I was so sleepy with my late early risings and
late goings to bed, that I could not do it, but was forced to go to
$67
bed and leave it to send away tomorrow by an Expresse.