1666-09-05

I lay down in the office again upon W. Hewer’s quilt, being
mighty weary and sore in my feet with going till I was hardly able
to stand. About 2 in the morning my wife calls me up and tells of
new Cryesof “Fyre!” —it being come to Barkeing Church, which is
the bottomofour lane. I up; and finding it so, resolved presently to
take her away; and did, and took my gold (which was about 23501),
W. Hewer, and Jane down by Poundy’s boat to Woolwich. But
Lord, what a sad sight it was by moonlight to see the whole City
almost on fire — that you might see it plain at Woolwich, as if you
were by it. There when I came, I find the gates shut, but no guard
kept at all; which troubled me, because of discourses now begun
that there is plot in it and that the French had done it. I got the gates
open, and to Mr. Shelden’s, where Ilocked up my gold and charged
my wife and W. Hewer never to leave the room without one of
them in it night nor day. So back again, by the way seeing my
goods well in the lighters at Deptford and watched well by people.
Home, and whereas I expected to have seen our house on fire, it
being now about 7 a-clock, it was not. But to the Fyre, and there
find greater hopes then Iexpected; for my confidence offinding our
office on fire was such, that Idurst not ask anybody how it was with
us, till Jcame and saw it not burned. But going to the fire, Ifind, by
the blowing up of houses and the great help given by the workmen
out of the King’s yards, sent up by Sir W. Penn, there is a good stop
given to it, as well at Marke lane end as ours — it having only burned
the Dyall of Barkeing Church, and part of the porch, and was there
quenched. I up to the top of Barkeing steeple, and there saw the
saddest sight of desolation that I ever saw. Everywhere great fires.
Oyle cellars and brimstone and other things burning. I became
afeared to stay there long; and therefore down again as fast as I
could, the fire being spread as far as I could see it, and to Sir W.
Penn’s and there eat a piece of cold meat, having eaten nothing since
Sunday but the remains of Sunday’s dinner.
Here I met with Mr. Young and Whistler; and having removed
all my things, and received good hopes that the fire at our end is
stopped, they and I walked into the town and find Fanchurch street,
Gracious street, and Lumbard street all in dust. The Exchange a sad
665
sight, nothing standing there ofall the statues or pillars but Sir Tho.
Gresham’s picture in the corner. Walked into Moorefields (our feet
ready to burn, walking through the town among the hot coles) and
find that full of people, and poor wretches carrying their goods
there, and everybody keeping his goods together by themselfs (and
a great blessing it is to them that it is fair weather for them to keep
abroad night and day); drank there, and paid twopence for a plain
penny loaf. Thence homeward, having passed through Cheapside
and Newgate market, all burned — and seen Anthony Joyces house
in fire. And took up (which I keep by me) a piece of glass of
Mercer’s chapel in the street, where much more was, so melted and
buckled with the heat of the fire, like parchment. I also did see a
poor Catt taken out of
a hole in the chimney joyning to the wall of
the Exchange, with the hair all burned off the body and yet alive. So
home at night, and find there good hopesof saving our office — but
great endeavours of watching all night and having men ready; and
so we lodged them in the office, and had drink and bread and cheese
for them. And I lay down and slept a good night about midnight —
though when I rose, I hear that there had been a great alarme of
French and Duch being risen — which proved nothing. But it is a
strange thing to see how long this time did look since Sunday,
having been alway full of variety of actions, and little sleep, that it
looked like a week or more. And I had forgot almost the dayof the
week. |