1666-07-28

Upandto the office, where no more news of the fleet then was
yesterday. Here we sat. And at noon to dinner to the Popes head,
where my Lord Brouncker (and his mistress dined) and Comis-
sioner Pett, Dr. Charleton, and myself entertained with a venison
pasty by Sir W. Warren. Here, very pretty discourse of Dr.
Charleton concerning Nature’s fashioning every creature’s teeth
according to the food she intends them. And that man’s, it is plain,
was not for flesh, but for fruit. And that he can at any time tell the
food of a beast unknown, by the teeth. My Lord Brouncker made
one or two objections to it; that creatures find their food proper for
their teeth, rather then that the teeth was fitted for the food. But the
Doctor, I think, did well observe that creatures do naturally, and
from the first, before they have had experience to try, do love sucha
food rather then another. And that all children love fruit, and none
brought to flesh but against their wills at first. Thence with my
Lord to his Coach-house, and there put in six horses into his coach
and he and I alone to Highgate — all the way, going and coming, I
learning of him the principles of Optickes, and what it is that makes
an object seem less or bigger. And how much distance doth lessen
645
an object. And that it is not the eye at all, or any rule in optiques,
that can tell distance; but it is only an act of reason, comparing of
one mark with another. Which did both please and inform me
mightily. Being come thither, we went to my Lord Lauderdale’s
house to speak with him about getting a man at Lieth to join with
one we imploy to buy some prize goods for the King. We find [him]
and his lady and some Scotch people at supper — pretty odd
company; though my Lord Brouncker tells me my Lord Lauder-
dale is a man of mighty good reason and judgment. But at supper
there played one of their servants upon the viallin, some Scotch
tunes only — several — and the best of their country, as they seemed
to esteem them by their praising and: admiring them; but Lord, the
strangest ayre that ever I heard in my life, and all of one cast. But
strange to hear my Lord Lauderdale say himself, that he had rather
hear a Catt mew then the best Musique in the world —and the better
the music, the more sick it makes him. And thatofall instruments,
he hates the Lute most; and next to that, the Baggpipe. Thence back
with my Lord to his house; all the way good discourse, informing
of myself about optiques still; and there left him, and by a hackney
home; and after writing three or four letters, home to supper and to
bed.