1666-08-06

Up and to the office a while. And then by water to my Lady
Mountagu’s at Westminster and there visited my Lord Hinch-
ingbrooke, newly come from Hinchingbrooke; and find him a
mighty sober gentleman — to my great content. Thence to Sir Ph.
Warwickes and my Lord Treasurer’s, but failed in my business. So
home, and in Fanchurch street met with Mr. Battersby; says he,
“Do you see Dan Rawlinson’s door shut up?” (which I did, and
wondered); ‘““Why,”’ says he, “‘after all the sickness, and himself
spending all the last year in the country — one of his men is now dead
of the plague, and his wife and one of his maids sick, and himself
shut up;” which troubles me mightily. So home, and there do hear
also from Mrs. Sarah Daniel that Greenwich is at this time much
worse then ever it was, and Deptford too; and she told us that they
believed all the town would leave the town and come to London;
which is now the receptacle of all the people from all infected places.
God preserve us. So by and by to dinner; and after dinner in comes
Mrs. Knepp; andI being at the office, went home to her, and there I
sat and talked with her, it being the first time ofher being here since
her being brought to bed. I very pleasant with her, but perceive my
wife hath no great pleasure in her being here, she not being pleased
with my kindness here to her. However, we talked and sang, and
were very pleasant. By and by comes Mr. Pierce and his wife, the
first time she also hath been here since her lying-in (both having
been brought to bed of boys, and both of them dead). And here we
648
talked and were pleasant; only, my wife in a chagrin humour, she
not being pleased with my kindness to either of them. But by this
means we had little pleasure in their visit; however, Knipp and I
sang, and then I offered them to carry them home and to take my
wife with me, but she would not go: so I with them, leaving my
wife in a very ill humour, and very slighting to them, which vexed
me. However, I would not be removed from my civility to them,
but sent for a coach and went with them; and in our way, Knipp
saying that she came out of doors without a dinner to us, I took
them to old Fishstreete, to the very house and room where I kept
my wedding-dinner, where I never was since; and there I did give
them a jole of Salmon and what else was to be had.