1666-10-28

Lay long in bed, and am come to agreement with my wife to
have Mercer again, on condition she may learn this winter two
months to dance, and she promises me she will endeavour to learn
to sing; and all this I am willing enough to. So up, and by and by the
glazier comes to finish the windows of my house, which pleases
me, and the bookbinder to gild the backs of my books. I got the
glass of my book-presses to be done presently, which did mightily
content me. And to setting my study inalittle better order; and so
to my office to my people busy about our Parliament accounts; and
so to dinner — and then at them again close. At night comes Sir W.
Penn, and he and I a turn in the garden, and he broke to me a
proposition of his and my joining in a design of fetching timber and
deals from Scotland by the help of Mr. Pett upon the place; which
1. The booksellers’: sc. Stationers’ Hall.
674
28 September—2 October 1666
while London is building, will yield good money. I approve it. We
judged a third man, that is knowing, is necessary; and concluded on
Sir W. Warren, and sent for him to come to us tomorrow morning.
30. Lords day. Up and to church, where I have not been a good
while; and there the church infinitely thronged with strangers since
the fire came into our parish; but not one handsome face in all of
them, as if endeed there was a curse, as Bishopp Fuller heretofore
said, upon our parish. Here I saw Mercer come into the church;
which I had a mind to, but she avoided looking up — which vexed
me. A pretty good sermon; and then home, and comes Balty and
dined with us —a good dinner; and then to have my hair cut against
winter close to my head, and then to church again. A sorry sermon,
and away home. W. Penn and I to walk, to talk about several
businesses; and then home, and my wife and I to read in Fullers
Church History, and so to supper and to bed.
This month ends with my mind full of business and concernment
how this office will speed with the Parliament, which begins to be
mighty severe in the examining our accounts and the expense of the
Navy this war.
—+OCTOBER#-
2. Up, andam sent for to Sir G. Carteret; and to him, and there he
tells me how our lists [of the ships and vessels employed in the war]
are referred to a sub-committee to consider and examine, and that I
am ordered to be there this afternoon. So I away thence to my new
bookbinder to see my books gilding in the backs, and then to
Westminster hall to the House and spoke with Sir W. Coventry,
where he told me I must attend the committee in the afternoon, and
received some hints of more work to do. So laway to the Chequer,
and thence to an alehouse and found Mr. Falconbrige, and agreed
for his kinswoman to come to me. He says she can dress my wife
and will do anything we would have her to do, and is ofa good
spirit — and mighty cheerful. He is much pleased therewith, and so
we shall be. So agreed for her coming the next week. So away
home, and eat a short dinner, and then with Sir W. Penn to
Westminster hall, and do give his boy my book of papers to hold,
while he went into the committee chamber in the inner Court of
675
Wardes and I walked without with Mr. Slingsby of the tower (who
was there, and did in walking inform me mightily in several things;
among others, that the heightening or lowering of money is only a
cheat, and doth good to some perticular men; which, if
I can but
remember how, I am now by him fully convinced of); anon Sir W.
Penn went away, telling me that W. Coventry, that was within,
had told him that the fleet is all come in to the buoy of the Nore, and
that he must hasten down to them, and so went away. And I into
the committee chamber before the committee sat, and there heard
Birch discourse highly and understandingly about the Navy
business and a proposal made heretofore to farm the Navy. But W.
Coventry did abundantly answer him — and is a most excellent
person. By and by the committee met, and I walked out; and anon
they rose and called me in, and appointed me to attend a committee
of them tomorrow at the office to examine our lists. This put me
into a mighty fear and trouble, they doing it in a very ill humour
methought. So I away, and called on my Lord Brouncker to desire
him to be there tomorrow. And so home, having taken up my wife
at Unthankes — full of trouble in mind to think what I shall be
obliged to answer, that am neither fully fit, nor in any measure
concerned to take the shame and trouble of this office upon me; but
only from the inability and folly of the Controller occasions it.
When come home, I to Sir W. Penn to his boy for my book, and
there find he hath it not, but delivered it to the doorkeeper of the
committee for me. This, added to my former disquiet, made me
stark mad, considering all the nakedness of the office lay open in
papers within those Covers. Icould not tell in the world what to do,
but was mad on all sides; and that which made me worse, Capt.
Cocke was there, and he did so swear and curse at the boy that told
me. So Cocke, Griffin, and the boy with me — they to find out the
housekeeper of the Parliament, Hughes, while I to Sir W.
Coventry, but could hear nothing of it there; but coming to our
Rendezvous at the Swan tavern in King street, I find they have
found the housekeeper, and the book simply locked up in the
Court. So I stayed and drank, and rewarded the doorkeeper and
away home, my heart lighter by all this; but to bed very sad
notwithstanding, in fear of what will happen tomorrow upon their
coming.