1666-11-14

To Knipp’s lodging, whom Ifind not ready to go home with
me, so away to do a little business; among others, to call upon Mr.
Osborne for my Tanger warrant for the last Quarter, and so to the
New Exchange for some things for my wife, and then to Knipp
again and there stayed, reading of Wallers verses while she finished
her dressing — her husband being by, I had no other pastime. Her
lodging very mean, and the condition she lives in; yet makes a show
without doors, God bless us. I carried him along with us into the
City, and set him down in Bishopsgate street and then home with
her. She telis me how Smith of the Duke’s house hath killed a man
upon a quarrel in play — which makes everybody sorry, he being a
good actor, and they say a good man, however this happens. The
ladies of the Court do much bemoan him, she says. Here she and we
alone at dinner. After dinner, I to teach her my new Recitative of It
is decreed — of which she learnt a good part; and I do well like it, and
believe shall be well pleased when she hath it all, and that it will be
found an agreeable thing. Then carried her home, and myself to the
Popeshead, where all the Houblons were, and Dr. Croone; and by
and by to an exceeding pretty supper — excellent discourse of all
sorts; and endeed, area set of the finest gentlemen that ever I met
withal in my life. Here Dr. Croone told me that at the meeting at
Gresham College tonight (which it seems they now have every
Wednesday again) there was a pretty experiment, of the blood of
one Dogg let out (till he died) into the body of another on one side,
while all his own run out on the other side. The first died upon the
place, and the other very well, and likely to do well. This did give
occasion to many pretty wishes, as of the blood ofa Quaker to be let
into an Archbishop, and such like. But, as Dr. Croone says, may if
it takes be of mighty use to man’s health, for the amending of bad
blood by borrowing from a better body. After supper James
Houblon and another brother took me aside, and to talk of some
businesses of their own, where I am to serve them, and will. And
692
then to talk of public matters; and I do find that they, and all
merchants else, do give over trade and the nation for lost — nothing
being done with care or foresight — no convoys granted, nor
anything done to satisfaction. But do think that the Duch and
French will master us the next year, do what we can; and so do I,
unless God Almighty makes the King to mind his business; which
might yet save all. Here we sat talking till past one in the morning,
and then home — where my people sat up for me, my wife and all;
and so to bed.