1666-04-18

And by coach with Sir W. Batten and Sir Tho. Allen to
Whitehall: and there, after attending the Duke as usual, and there
concluding of many things preparative to the Prince and the
Generalls going to sea on Monday next
— Sir W. Batten and Sir Tho.
Allen and I to Mr. Lillys the painter’s, and there saw the heads,
some finished and all begun, of the Flaggmen in the late great fight
607
1666 18 April
with the Duke of Yorke against the Dutch. The Duke of York hath
them done to hang in his chamber, and very finely they are done
endeed. There is the Prince’s — Sir G. Askues, Sir Tho. Teddiman’s
— Sir Chr. Mings, Sir Joseph Jordan, Sir Wm. Barkely, Sir Tho.
Allen, and Captain Harman’s, as also the Duke of Albemarles — and
will be my Lord Sandwiche’s, Sir W. Pen’s, andSir Jerem. Smiths.
Being very well satisfied with this sight, and other good pictures
hanging in the house, we parted; and Ileft them, and [to] pass away
a little time went to the printed picture-seller’s in the way thence to
the Exchange; and there did see great plenty of fine prints but did
not buy any, only a print ofan old pillar in Rome, made for a Navall
Triumph, which for the antiquity of the shape of ships I buy an
keep. Thence to the Exchange, that is, the New Exchange, and
looked over some play-books, and entend to get all the late new
plays. So to Westminster and there at the Swan got a bit of meat and
dined alone, and so away toward King’s street; and spying out of
my coach Jane that lived heretofore at Jervas my barber’s, I went a
little further, and stopped and went on foot back and overtook her
taking water at Westminster bridge and spoke to her; and she telling
me whither she was going, I over the water and met her at
Lambeth, and there drank with her, she telling me how he that was
so long her servant did prove to be a married man, though her
maister told me (which she denies) that he had lain with her several
times at his house. There left her, sin hazer alguna cosa con ella; and
so away by boat to the Change and took coach and to Mr. Hales,
where he would have persuaded me to have had the landskip stand
in my picture; but I like it not and will have it otherwise, which I
perceive he doth not like so well — however, is so civil as to say it
shall be altered. Thence away to Mrs. Pierces, who was not at
home, but gone to my house to visit me with Mrs. Knipp. I
therefore took up the little girl Betty and my maid Mary that now
lives there. And to my house, where they had been but were gone;
so in our way back again, met them coming back again to my house
in Cornehill, and there stopped, laughing at our pretty misfortunes;
and so I carried them to Fish street and there treated them with
prawns and lobsters; and it beginning to grow dark, we away; but
the jest is, our horses would not draw us up the Hill, but we were
fain to light and stay till the coachman had made them draw down
to the bottom of the hill, thereby warming their legs; and then they
came up cheerfully enough, and we got up and
I carried them home;
and coming home, called at my paper ruler’s and there found black*
608
Nan, which pleases me mightily; and having saluted her again and
again, away home and to bed — apres ayant tocado les mamelles de
Mercer, que eran ouverts, con grand plaisir. So to bed. In all my
riding in the coach, and intervals, my mind hath been full these
three weeks of setting to music It is decreed &c..