1666-12-24

Up, and to the office, where Lord Brouncker, J. Mennes, W.
Penn, and myself met; and there I did use my notes I took on
Saturday night about tickets, and did come to a good settlement in
that business of that office, if it be kept to — this morning being a
meeting on purpose. At noon, to prevent my Lord Brouncker’s
dining here, I walked as if upon business with him (it being frost
and dry) as far as Paul’s, and so back again through the City by
Yildhall, observing the ruines thereabouts, till I did truly lose
myself; and so home to dinner. I do truly find that I have
705
overwrought my eyes, so that now they are become weak and apt
to be tired, and all excess of light makes them sore, so that now, to
the candlelight I am forced to sit by, adding the Snow upon the
ground all day, my eyes are very bad, and will be worse if not
helped; so my Lord Brouncker doth advise me, as a certain cure, to
use Greene Spectacles, which I will do. So to dinner, where Mercer
with us, and very merry. After dinner, she goes and fetchesa little
son of Mr. Buckeworths, the whitest-haired and of the most spirit
that ever Isaw in my life—for discourse of all kind, and so ready and
to the purpose, not above four year old. Thence to Sir Robt. Viners
and there paid for the plate I have bought, to the value of 94/, with
the roolCapt. Cocke did give me to that purpose, and received the
rest in money. I this evening did buy me a pair of green spectacles,
to see whether they will help my eyes or no. So to the Change, and
went to the Upper Change, which is almost as good as the old one;
only shops are but on one side. Then home to the office and did
business till my eyes begun to be bad; and so home to supper (my
people busy making mince pies) and so to bed. No news yet of our
Gottenburgh fleet; which makes [me] have some fears, it being of
mighty concernment to have our supply of masts safe. I met with
Mr. Cade tonight, my stationer, and he tells me that he hears for
certain that the Queene-Mother is about and hath near finished a
peace with France; which, as a Presbyterian, he doth not like, but
seems to fear it will be a means to introduce Popery.