1666-09-08

Up, and with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Penn by water to
Whitehall, and they to St. James’s. I stopped with Sir G. Carteret,
to desire him to go with us and to enquire after money. But the first
he cannot do, and the other as little, or says, ““‘When can we get any,
or what shall we do for it?” He, it seems, is imployed in the
correspondence between the City and the King every day, in
settling of things. I find him full of trouble to think how things will
go. I left him, and to St. James’s, where we met first at Sir W.
668
& September 1666
Coventry’s chamber and there did what business we can without
any books. Our discourse, as everything else, was confused. The
fleet is at Portsmouth, there staying a wind to carry them to the
Downes or toward Bullen, where they say the Duch fleete is gone
and stays. We concluded upon private meetings for a while, not
having any money to satisfy any people that may come to us. I
bought two eeles upon the Thames, cost me 6s. Thence with Sir W.
Batten to the Cockpit, whither the Duke of Albemarle is come. It
seems the King holds him so necessary at this time, that he hath sent
for him and will keep him here. Endeed, his interest in the City,
being acquainted, and his care in keeping things quiet, is reckoned
that wherein he will be very serviceable. We to him. He is courted
in appearance by everybody. He very kind to us. I perceive he lays
by all business of the fleet at present and minds the City, and is now
hastening to Gresham College to discourse with the Aldermen. Sir
W. Batten and I home (where met by my Brother John, come to
town to see how things are with us). And then presently he with me
to Gresham College — where infinite of people; partly through
novelty to see the new place, and partly to find out and hear what is
become one man of another. I met with many people undone, and
more that have extraordinary great losses. People speaking their
thoughts variously about the beginning of the fire and the
rebuilding of the City. Then to Sir W. Batten and took my brother
with me, and there dined with a great company of neighbours, and
much good discourse; among others, of the low spirits of some rich
men in the City, in sparing any encouragement to the poor people
that wrought for the saving their houses. Among others, Ald.
Starling, a very rich man, without children, the fire at next door to
him in our Lane — after our men had saved his house, did give 2s. 6d.
among 30 of them, and did quarrel with some that would remove
the rubbish out of the wayofthe fire, saying that they came to steal.
Sir W. Coventry told me of another this morning in Holborne,
which he showed the King — that when it was offered to stop the fire
near his house for such a reward, that came but to 2s. 6d. a man
among the neighbours, he would give but 18d. Thence to Bednall
green by coach, my brother with me, and saw all well there and
fetched away my Journall-book to enter for five days past. To the
office, and late writing letters; and then to Sir W. Penn, my brother
lying with me, and Sir W. Penn gone down to rest himself at
Woolwich. But I was much frighted, and kept awake in my bed, by
some noise I heard a great while below-stairs and the boys not
669
coming up to me when I knocked. It was by their discovery of
people stealing of some neighbours’ wine that lay in vessels in the
street. So to sleep. And all well all night.