1666-12-19

Up and by water to Whitehall, and there with the Duke of
York did our usual business. But nothing but complaints of want of
money, with[out] success, and Sir W. Coventry’s complaint of the
defects of our office (endeed Sir J. Mennes’s), without any
amendment. And he tells us so plainly of the committee of
Parliament’s resolution to enquire home into all our managements,
that it makes me resolve to be wary and to do all things betimes to
be ready for them. Thence, going away, met Mr. Hingston the
Organist (my old acquaintance) in the Court, and Itook him to the
Dogg tavern and got him to set mea bass to my It is decreed, which I
think will go well; but he commends the song, not knowing the
words, but says the ayre 1s good, and believes the words are plainly
expressed. He is of my mind, against having of eighths unnecess-
arily in composition. This did all please me mightily. Then to talk
of the King’s family: he says many of the Musique are ready to
starve, they being five years behindhand for their wages. Nay,
Evens, the famous man upon the Harp, having not his equal in the
world, did the other day die for mere want, and was fain to be
buried at the almes of the parish —and carried to his grave in the dark
of night, without one Linke, but that Mr. Hingston met it by
chance and did give 12d. to buy two or three links. He says all must
come to ruin at this rate, and Ibelieve him. Thence home, and upon
Tower hill saw about 3 or 400 seamen get together; and one,
704
standing uponapile of bricks, made his sign with his handkercher
upon his stick, and called all the rest to him, and several shouts they
gave. This made me afeared, so I got home as fast as I could — and
hearing of no present hurt, did go to Sir Robt. Viners about my
plate again; and coming home, do hear of 1000 seamen said in the
streets to be in armes. So in great fear home, expecting to find a
tumult about our house, and was doubtful of my riches there — but I
thank God, I found all well. But by and by Sir W. Batten and Sir R.
Ford do tell me that the seamen have been at some prisons to release
some seamen, and that the Duke of Albemarle is in armes, and all
the Guards at the other end of the town; and the Duke of Albemarle
is gone with some forces to Wapping to quell the seamen — which is
a thingofinfinite disgrace to us. I sat long, talking with them. And
among other things, Sir R. Ford did make me understand how the
House of Commons is a beast not to be understood — it being
impossible to know beforehand the success almost of any small
plain thing — there being so many to think and speak to any
business, and they of so uncertain minds and interests and passions.
He did tell me and so did Sir W. Batten, how Sir Allen Brodericke
and Sir Allen Apsly did come drunk the other day into the House,
and did both speak for half an hour together, and could not be either
laughed or pulled or bid to sit down and hold their peace — to the
great contempt of the King’s servants and cause — which I am
agerieved at with all my heart. We were full in discourse of the sad
state of our times. And the horrid shame brought on the King’s
service by the just clamours of the poor seamen. And that we must
be undone in a little time. Home, full of trouble on these
considerations. And among other things, I to my chamber and
there to ticket a good part of my books, in order to the Numbring
of them — for my easy finding them to read, as Ihave occasion. So to
supper and to bed — with my heart full of trouble.