1666-09-04

Up by break of day to get away the remainder of my things,
whichI did by a lighter at the Iron gate; and my hands so few, that it
was the afternoon before we could get them all away. Sir W. Penn
663
1666 4 September
and I to Tower street, and there met the fire Burning three or four
doors beyond Mr. Howells; whose goods, poor man (his trayes and
dishes, Shovells &c., were flung all along Tower street in the
kennels, and people working therewith from one end to the other),
the fire coming on in that narrow street, on both sides, with infinite
fury. Sir W. Batten, not knowing how to remove his wind, * did dig
a pit in the garden and laid it in there; and I took the opportunity of
laying all the papers of my office that I could not otherwise dispose
of. And in the evening Sir W. Penn and Idid dig another and put our
wine in it, and I my parmazan cheese as well as my wine and some
other things. The Duke of York was at the office this day at Sir W.
Penn’s, but I happened not to be within. This afternoon, sitting
melancholy with Sir W. Penn in our garden and thinking of the
certain burning of this office without extraordinary means, | did
propose for the sending upofall our workmen from Woolwich and
Deptford yards (none whereof yet appeared), and to write to Sir W.
Coventry to have the Duke of York’s permission to pull down
houses rather then lose this office, which would much hinder the
King’s business. So Sir W. Penn he went down this night, in order
to the sending them up tomorrow morning; and I wrote to Sir W.
Coventry about the business, but received no answer.
_ This night Mrs. Turner (who, poor woman, was removing her
goods all this day — good goods, into the garden, and knew not how
to dispose of them) — and her husband supped with my wife and I at
night in the office, upon a shoulder of mutton from the cook’s,
without any napkin or anything, in a sad manner but were merry.
Only, now and then walking into the garden and saw how horridly
the sky looks, all on a fire in the night, was enough to put us out of
our wits; and endeed it was extremely dreadfull — for it looks just as
ifit was at us, and the whole heaven on fire. I after supper walked in
the dark down to Tower street, and there saw it all on fire at the
Trinity house on that side and the Dolphin tavern on this side,
which was very near us — and the fire with extraordinary
vehemence. Now begins the practice of blowing up of houses in
Tower street, those next the Tower, which at first did frighten
people more then anything; but it stop[ped] the fire where it was
done —it bringing down the houses to the ground in the same places
they stood, and then it was easy to quench what little fire was in it,
though it kindled nothing almost. W. Hewer this day went to see
how his mother did, and comes late home, but telling us how he
hath been forced to remove her to Islington, her house in pye
664
Corner being burned. So that it is got so far that way and all the Old
Bayly, and was running down to Fleetestreet. And Pauls is burned,
and all Cheapside. I wrote to my father this night; but the post-
house being burned, the letter could not go.