1666-11-31

Out with Sir W. Batten toward Whitehall, being in pain in my
cods by being squeezed the other night ina little coach when |
carried Pierce and his wife and my people. But Ihope Ishall be soon
well again. And after dinner to my closet, where I spent the whole
afternoon till late at evening of all my accounts, public and private;
and to my great satisfaction I do find that I do bring my accounts to
a very near balance, notwithstanding all the hurries and troubles I
have been put to by the late Fire, that I have not been able to even
my accounts since July last before. And I bless God, I do find that I
am worth more then ever I yet was, which is 62001 — for which the
holy name of God be praised. And my other accounts, of Tanger, in
a very plain and clear condition, that Iam not liable to any trouble
from them. But in fear great 1am, and I perceive the whole City is,
of some distractions and disorders among us, which God of his
goodness prevent. Late to supper with my wife and brother, and
then to bed.
And thus ends the month — with an ill aspect. The business of the
Navy standing wholly still. No credit. No goods sold us. Nobody
will trust. All we have to do at the office is to hear complaints for
want of money. The Duke of York himself, for now three weeks,
seems to rest satisfied that we can do nothing without money, and
that all must stand still till the King gets money — which the
Parliament have been a great while about, but are so dissatisfied
with the King’s management, and his giving himself up to
pleasures, and not minding the calling to account any of his officers
— and they observe so much the expense of the war, and yet that
after we have made it the most we can, it doth not amount to what
they have given the King for the Warr, that they are backward of
giving any more. However, 1800000! they have voted, but the way
of gathering it hath taken up more time then is fit to be now lost.
The seamen grow very rude, and everything out of order —
commanders having no power over their seamen, but the seamen
do what they please. Few stay on board, but all coming running up
hither to town; and nobody can with justice blame them, we owing
685
1666 31 October—2 November
them so much money, and their families must starve if we do not
give them money or they procure upon their tickets from some
people that will trust them. A great folly is observed by all people,
in the King’s giving leave to so many merchantmen to go abroad
this winter, and some upon voyages where it is impossible they
should be back again by the spring; and the rest will be doubtful,
but yet we let them go. What the reasonofstate is, nobody can tell,
but all condemn it. The Prince and Duke of Albemarle have got no
great credit by this year’s service, our losses, both of reputation and
ships, having been greater then is thought have ever been suffered
in all ages put together before. Great folly in both Houses of
Parliament, several persons falling together by the eares; among
others, in the House of Lords, the Duke of Buckingham and my
Lord Ossory. Such is our case, that everybody fears an invasion the
next year; and for my part, I do methinks foresee some great
unhappiness coming upon us, and do provide for it by laying by
something against a rainy day — dividing what Ihave and laying it in
several places — but with all faithfulness to the King in all respects —
my grief only being that the King doth not look after his business
himself, and thereby will be undone, both himself and his nations —
it being not yet, Ibelieve, too late, ifhe would apply himself to it, to
save all and conquer the Duch; but while he and the Duke of York
mind their pleasure as they do, and nothing else, we must be beaten.
So late, with my mind in good condition of quiet after the settling
all my accounts, and to bed.
-—*NOVEMBER%-
2. Up betimes, and with Sir W. Batten to Woolwich, where first
we went on board the Ruby, [a] French prize, the only ship of war
we have taken from any of our enemies this year. It seems a very
good ship, but with galleries quite round the Sterne to walk in, as a
Balcone, which will be taken down. She had also about 40 good
brass guns, but will make little amends to our loss in the Prince.
Thence to the Ropeyard and the other yards to do several
businesses. He, and I also, did buy some apples and pork; by the
same token, the Bucher commended it as the best in England for
Cloath and Colour — and for his beef, says he, “Look how fat it is;
the lean appears only here and there a speck, like Beauty spots.”
686
Having done at Woolwich, we to Depford (it being very cold upon
the water) and there did alsoa little more business; and so home, I
reading all the way to make end of The Bondman (which the oftener |
read, the more Ilike), and begin The Duchesse ofMalfy, which seems
a good play. At home to dinner, and there came Mr. Pierce,
Chyrurgeon, to see me; and after I had eat something, he and I and
my wife by coach to Westminster; she set us down at Whitehall and
she to her brother’s —I up into the House, and among other things
walked a goodwhile with the Sergeant Trumpet, who tells me, as I
wished, that the King’s Italian here is about setting three parts for
Trumpets and shall teach some to sound them, and believes they
will [be] admirable Musique. Ialso walked with Sir St. Fox an hour,
and good discourse of public business with him — who seems very
much satisfied with my discourse, and desired more of my
acquaintance. Then comes out the King and Duke of York from the
Council, and so I spoke a while to Sir W. Coventry about some
office business; and so called my wife and so home; and I to my
chamber to do some business, and then to supper and to bed.