1666-09-07

Up by 5 a-clock and, blessed be God, find all well, and by water
to Paul’s wharfe. Walked thence and saw all the town burned, and a
miserable sight of Pauls church, with all the roofs fallen and the
body of the Quire fallen into St Fayths — Paul’s school also —
Ludgate — Fleet street - my father’s house, and the church, and a
good part of the Temple the like. So to Creeds lodging near the
New Exchange, and there find him laid down upon a bed — the
house all unfurnished, there being fears of the fire’s coming to
them. There borrowed a shirt of him — and washed. To Sir W.
Coventry at St. James’s, who lay without Curtains, having
removed all his goods —as the King at Whitehall and everybody had
done and was doing. He hopes we shall have no public distractions
upon this fire, which is what everybody fears — because of the talk of
the French having a hand in it. And it is a proper time for
discontents — but all men’s minds are full of care to protect themselfs
and save their goods. The Militia is in armes everywhere. Our
Fleetes, he tells me, have been in sight of one another, and most
unhappily by Fowle weather were parted, to our great loss, as in
667
reason they do conclude — the Duch being come out only to make a
show and please their people; but in very bad condition as to stores,
victuals, and men. They are at Bullen, and our fleet come to St.
Ellens. We have got nothing, but have lost one ship, but he knows
not what.
Thence to the Swan and there drank; and so home and find all
well. My Lord Brouncker at Sir W. Batten’s, and tells us the
Generall is sent for up to come to advise with the King about
business at this juncture, and to keep all quiet — which is great
honour to him, but I am sure is but a piece of dissimulation. So
home and did give order for my house to be made clean; and then
down to Woolwich and there find all well. Dined, and Mrs.
Markeham came to see my wife. So I up again, and calling at
Deptford for some things of W. Hewer, he being with me; and then
home and spent the evening with Sir R. Ford, Mr. Knightly, and
Sir W. Penn at Sir W. Batten’s. This day our Merchants first met at
Gresham College, which by proclamation is to be their Exchange.
Strange to hear what is bid for houses all up and down here — a
friend of Sir W. Riders having 150l for what he used to let for 40l per
annum. Much dispute where the Custome house shall be; thereby
the growth of the City again to be foreseen. My Lord Treasurer,
they say, and others, would have it at the other end of the town. |
home late to Sir W. Penn, who did give me a bed — but without
curtains or hangings, all being down. So here I went the first time
into a naked bed, only my drawers on — and did sleep pretty well;
but still, both sleeping and waking, had a fear of fire in my heart,
that I took little rest. People do all the world over cry out of the
simplicity of my Lord Mayor in general, and more perticularly in
this business of the fire, laying it all upon him. A proclamation is
come out for markets to be kept at Leadenhall and Mile end greene
and several other places about the town, and Tower hill, and all
churches to be set open to receive poor people.