1666-10-29

Up, and to the office to do business, and thither comes to me
Sir Tho. Teddiman, and he and Iwalked a good while in the garden
together, discoursing of the disorder and discipline of the fleet,
wherein he told me how bad everything is but was very wary in
speaking anything to the dishonour of the Prince or Duke of
Albemarle; but doth magnify my Lord Sandwich much before
them both for ability to serve the King, and doth heartily wish for
him here — for he fears that we shall be undone the next year, but
that he will, however, see an end of it. To prevent the necessity of
his dining with me, I was forced to pretend occasion of going to
Westminster; so away I went, and Mr. Barber the clerk, having a
request to make to me to get him into imployment, did walk along
with me and by water to Westminster with me—he professing great
love to me, and an-able clerk he is. When I come thither, I find the
new Lord Mayor Bolton a-swearing at the Exchequer with some of
the Aldermen and Livery; but Lord, to see how meanely they now
look, who upon this day used to be all little lords, is a sad sight and
worthy consideration. And everybody did reflect with pity upon
the poor City, to which they are now coming to choose and swear
their Lord Mayor, compared with what it heretofore was. Thence
by coach (having in the Hall bought me a
velvet riding cap, cost me
683
20s.) to my Taylors, and there bespoke a plain vest. And so to my
goldsmith to bid him look out for some gold for me; and he tells me
that Ginnys, which I bought 2000 of not long ago, and cost me but
183d. change, will now cost me 22d., and but very few to be had at
any price. However, some more I will have, for they are very
convenient — and of easy disposal. So home to dinner, and to
discourse with my brother upon his translation of my Lord Bacon’s
Faber Fortune which I gave him to do; and he hath done it but
meanly, Iam not pleased with it at all— having done it only literally,
but without any life at all. About 5 a-clock I took my wife (who is
mighty fine, and with a new fair pair of locks, which vex me,
though like a fool I helped her the other night to buy them), and to
Mrs. Pierce’s; and there stayingalittle, away before to Whitehall
and into the new playhouse there, the first time Iever was there, and
the first play I have seen since before the great plague. By and by
Mr. Pierce comes, bringing my wife and his, and Knipp. By and by
the King and Queen, Duke and Duchesse, and all the great ladies of
the Court; which endeed wasafine sight — but the play, being Love
ina Tubb, a silly play; and though done by the Duke’s people, yet
having neither Baterton nor his wife — and the whole thing done ill,
and being ill also, I had no manner of pleasure in the play. Besides,
the House, though very fine, yet bad for the voice — for hearing.
The sight of the ladies, endeed, was exceeding noble; and above all
my Lady Castlemayne. The play done by 10 a-clock, I carried them
all home; and then home myself and, well satisfied with the sight
but not the play, we with great content to bed.