1666-06-24

Sunday. Midsummer Day. Up, but, being weary the last night,
not so soon as I intended. Then being dressed, I down by water to
Deptford and there did a great deal of business, being in a mighty
hurry — Sir W. Coventry writing to me that there was some
thoughts that the Duch fleet were out or coming out. Business
being done, in providing for the carrying down of some provisions
634
24 June 1666
to the fleet, I away back home. And after dinner, by water to
Whitehall and there waited, till the Council rose, in the boarden
gallery. By and by the Council rises, and Sir W. Coventry comes
out and he and I went aside and discoursed of much business of the
Navy; and afterwards took his coach and to Hide parke, he and I
alone. There we had much talk. First, he started a discourse of a talk
he hears about the town, which, says he, is a very bad one, and fit to
be suppressed if we knew how: which is the comparing of the
success of the last year with that of this, saying that that was good
and that bad. Then to discourse of himself, saying that he heard that
he was under the lash of people’s discourse about the Princes not
having notice of the Dutch being out and for him to come back
again, nor the Duke of Albemarle notice that the Prince was sent for
back again. To which, he told me very perticularly how careful he
was, the very same night that it was to resolve to send for the Prince
back, to cause orders to be writ; and waked the Duke,! who was
then in bed, to sign them; and that they went by express that very
night, being the Wednesdy night before the Fight, which begun on
the Friday; and that, for sending them by the post express and not
by gentlemen on purpose, he made a sportofit, and said, “I knew
none to send it with but would at least have lost more time in fitting
themselfs out then any diligence of theirs beyond that that the
ordinary post would have recovered.” I told him that this was not
so much the towne talk as the reason of dividing the Fleete. To this,
he told me he ought not to say much; but did assure me in general,
that the proposition did first come from the Fleete; and the
resolution not being prosecuted with orders so soon as the Generall?
thought fit, the Generall did send Sir Edwd. Spragge up
on purpose for them; and that there was nothing in the whole
business which was not done with the full consent and advice of the
Duke of Albemarle. He tells me, as to the business of Intelligence,
the want whereof the world did complain much of, that for that it
was not his business, and as he was therefore to have no share in the
blame, so he would not meddle to lay it anywhere else. He doth not
disowne but that the dividing of the fleet, upon the presumptions
that was then had (which I suppose was the French fleet being come
this way), was a good resolution.
1. The Duke of York.
2. Albemarle.
635