1666-07-30

Up and to the office; and mightily troubled all this morning
with going to my Lord Mayor (Sir Tho. Bludworth, a
silly man I
think) and other places about getting shipped some men that they
have these two last nights pressed in the City out of houses — the
persons wholly unfit for sea, and many of them people of very good
fashion — which is a shame to think of; and carried to Bridewell they
are, yet without being impressed with money legally, as they ought
to be. But to see how the King’s business is done, my Lord Mayor
himself did scruple, at this time of extremity, to do this thing,
because he had not money to pay the prest money to the men — he
told me so himself; nor to take up boats to carry them down
through bridge to the ships I have prepared to carry them down in.
Insomuch that I was forced to promise to be his paymaister; and he
did send his City Remembrancer afterward to the office, and at the.
table, in the face of the officers, I did there out of my own purse
disburse 15] to pay for their pressing and diet last night and this
morning — which is a thing worth record of my Lord Mayor. Busy
about this all the morning. At noon dined, and then to the office
again, and all the afternoon, till 12 at night, full of this business and
others. And among those others, about the getting of men pressed
by our officers of the fleet into the service, even our own men that
[are] at the office and the boats that carries us — so that it is now
become impossible to have so much asa
letter carried from place to
place, or any message done for us. Nay, out of victualling ships full
loaden to go down to the fleet, and out of vessels of the Officers of
the Ordinance, they press men; so that for want of discipline in this
respect, I do fear all will be undone. Vexed with these things, but
eased in mind by my ridding of a great deal of business from the
office, I late home to supper and to bed. But before I was in bed,
637
1666 30 June-1 July
while I was undressing myself, our new ugly maid Luce had like to
have broke her neck in the dark, going down our upper stairs; but
(which I was glad of) the poor girl did only bruise her head. But at
first did lie on the ground groaning, and drawing her breath like one
a-dying.
This month I end in much hurry of business, but in much more
trouble in mind to think what will become of public businesses,
having so many enemies abroad, and neither force — nor money at
all — and but little Courage for ourselfs. It being really true that the
spirits of our seamen, and commanders too, are really broke by the
last defeat with the Duch; and this is not my conjecture only, but the
real and serious thoughts of Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Coventry, -
whom I have at distinct times hear[d] the same thing come from,
with a great deal of grief and trouble. But lastly, I am providing
against a foul day, to get as much money into my hands as I can, at
least out of the public hands, that so, if a turn (which I fear) do
come, I may havea little to trust to. I pray God give me good
success in my choice how to dispose of what little Ihave, that I may
not take it out of public hands and put it into worse.
— JULY
3
1. Sunday. Up betimes and to the office, receiving letters, two or
three one after another, from Sir W. Coventry, and sent as many to
him — being full of variety of business and hurry; but among the
chiefest, is the getting of these pressed men out of the City down the
River to the fleet. While I was hard at it, comes Sir W. Pen to town,
which I little expected, having invited my Lady and her daughter
Pegg to dine with me today — which at noon they did, and Sir W.
Penn with them, and pretty merry we were. And though I do not
love him, yet I find it necessary to keep in with him — his good
service at Sherenesse in getting out the fleet being much taken
notice of, and reported to the King and Duke even from the Prince
and Duke of Albemarle themselfs, and made the most of to me and
them by Sir W. Coventry. Therefore, Ithink it discretion, great and
necessary discretion, to keep in with him. After dinner to the office
again, where busy; and then down to Deptford to the yard,
thinking to have seen Bagwell’s wife, whose husband is gone
yesterday back to the fleet; but I did not see her, so missed what I
638
went for; and so back and to the Tower several times about the
business of the pressed men, and late at it, till 12 at night, shipping
of them. But Lord, how some poor women did cry, and in my life I
never did see such natural expression of passion as | did here — in
some women’s bewailing themselfs, and running to every parcel of
men that were brought, one after another, to look for their
husbands, and wept over every vessel that went off, thinking they
might be there, and looking after the ship as far as ever they could
by moonelight — that it grieved me to the heart to hear them.
Besides, to see poor patient labouring men and housekeepers,
leaving poor wifes and families, taken up on a sudden by strangers,
was very hard; and that without press-money, but forced against all
law to be gone. It is a great tyranny. Having done this, I to the
Lieutenant of the Tower and bade him good-night, and so away
home and to bed.