1666-11-15

This [morning] came Mr. Sheply (newly out of the country)
to see me; after a little discourse with him, I to the office, where we
sat all the morning. And at noon home, and there dined, Sheply
with me, and after dinner I did pay him 7ol, which he had paid my
father for my use in the country. He being gone, Itook coach and to
Mr. Pierce’s, where I find her as fine as possible, and himself going
to the Ball at night at Court, it being the Queenes Birthday. And so
I carried them in my coach; and having set them into the house, and
gotten Mr. Pierce to undertake the carrying in my wife, I to
Unthankes, where she appointed to be, and there told her; and back
again about business to Whitehall while Pierce went and fetched her
and carried her in. I, after [had met with Sir W. Coventry and given
him some account of matters, I also to the Ball, and with much ado
got up to the Loft, where with much trouble I could see very well.
Anon the house grew full, and the candles lit, and the King and
Queen and all the ladies set. And it was endeed a glorious sight to
see Mrs. Steward in black and white lace — and her head and
shoulders dressed with Dyamonds. And the like a great many great
ladies more (only, the Queene none); and the King in his rich vest of
some rich silk and silver trimming, as the Duke of York and all the
dancers were, some of cloth of silver, and others of other sorts,
exceeding rich. Presently after the King was come in, he took the
Queene, and about fourteen more couple there was, and begun the
Bransles. As many of the men as I can remember presently, were:
the King — Duke of York — Prince Rupert — Duke of Monmouth —
Duke of Buckingham — Lord Douglas — Mr. Hamilton — Coll.
Russell — Mr. Griffith — Lord Ossory — Lord Rochester. And of the
ladies — the Queene — Duchess of York — Mrs. Steward — Duchess of
Monmouth — Lady Essex Howard — Mrs. Temple — Swedes
Embassadresse — Lady Arlington — Lord George Barkeley’s
daughter. And many others I remember not. But all most
693
excellently dressed, in rich petticoats and gowns and Dyamonds —
and pearl. After the Bransles, then to a Corant, and now and then a
French Dance; but that so rare that the Corants grew tiresome, that
I wished it done. Only, Mrs. Steward danced mighty finely, and
many French dances, especially one the King called the New
Dance, which was very pretty. But upon the whole matter, the
business of the dancing itself was not extraordinary pleasing. But
the clothes and sight of the persons was indeed very pleasing, and
worth my coming, being never likely to see more gallantry while I
live —if I should come twenty times. About 12 at night it broke up,
and | to hire a coach with much difficulty; but Pierce had hired a
chair for my wife, and so she being gone to his house — he and I
(taking up Barker at Unthankes) to his house— whither his wife was
come home a good while ago, and gone to bed. So away home with
my wife — between displeased at the dull dancing, and satisfied at
the clothes and persons (my Lady Castlemayne (without whom all
is nothing) being there, very rich, though not dancing); and so after
supper, it being very cold, to bed.