1666-05-30

Up, and being ready to finish my journalls for four days past —
to the office, where busy all the morning. At noon dined alone, my
wife gone abroad to conclude about her necklace of pearl. I after
dinner to even all my accounts of this month; and, bless God, I find
myself, notwithstanding great expenses of late — viz., 801 now to
pay for a necklace — near 4ol for a set of chairs and couch — near 4ol
for my three pictures — yet I do gather, and am now worth $200.
My wife comes home by and by, and hath pitched upon a necklace
with three rows, which is a very good one, and 8ol is the price. In
the evening with my [wife] and Mercer by coach to take the ayre as
far as Bow, and eat-and drank in the coach by the way, and with
much pleasure and pleased with my company: at night home and up
to the leads; but were, contrary to expectation, driven down again
witha stink, by Sir W. Pen’s emptying ofa shitten pot in their house
of office close by; which doth trouble me, for fear it do hereafter
annoy me. So down to singalittle, and then to bed. So ends this
month, with great layings-out — good health and gettings, and
611
1666 30 April—2 May
advanced well in the whole of my estate; for which God make me
thankful.
—&MAY 2-
1. Up, and all the morning at the office. At noon my Cosen Tho.
Pepys did come to me to consult about the business of his being a
Justice of the Peace, which he is much against; and among other
reasons, tells me as a confidence that he is not free to exercise
punishment according to the act against Quakers and other people,
for religion. Nor doth he understand Latin, and so is not capable of
the place as formerly, now all warrants do run in Latin. Not is he in
Kent, though he be of Deptford parish, his house standing in Surry.
However, I did bring him to encline toward it if he be pressed to
take it. I do think it may be some repute to me to have my kinsman
in commission there — especially if he behave himself to content in
the country. He gone, and my wife gone abroad, I out also, to and
fro to see and be seen; among others, to find out in Thames street
where Betty Howlett is come to live, being married to Mrs.
Michells son — which I did about the Old Swan, but did not think fit
to go thither or see them. Thence by water to Redriffe, reading a
new French book my Lord Brouncker did give me today, L’histoire
amoureuse des Gaules, being a pretty Libell against the amours of the
Court of France. I walked up and down Deptford yard, where Ihad
not been since I came from living at Greenwich — which is some
months. There I met with Mr. Castle and was forced against my
will to have his company back with me. So we walked and drank at
the Halfway house, and so to his house, where I drank a cup of
Syder; and so home — where I find Mr. Norbury, newly come to
town, come to see us. After he gone, my wife tells me the ill News
that our Su is sick, and gone to bed with great pain in her head and
back — which troubles us all. However, we to bed, expecting what
tomorrow would produce. She hath, we conceive, wrought a
little
too much, having neither maid nor girl to help her.
2. Up, and find the girl better, which we are glad of. Iwith Sir W.
Batten to Whitehall by coach. There attended the Duke as usual.
Thence with Capt. Cocke, whom I met there, to London to my
office to consult about serving him in getting him some money, he
612
being already tired of his slavery to my Lord Brouncker and the
charge it costs him, and gets no manner of courtesy from him for it.
He gone, I home to dinner. Find the girl yet better, so no fear of
being forced to send her out of doors as we intended.