1666-08-28

Up, and in my new closet a good while, doing business. Then
called on by Mrs. Martin and Burroughs of Westminster, about
business of the former’s husband — which done, I to the office,
where we sat all the morning. At noon I with my wife and Mercer
to Philpott lane, a great cook’s shop, to the wedding of Mr.
Longracke our Purveyor, a good sober civil man, and hath married a
sober serious mayde. Here I met much ordinary company, going
thither at his great request — but there was Mr. Madden and his lady,
a fine noble pretty lady — and he a fine gentleman seems to be. We
four were most together; but the whole company was very simple
and innocent. A good dinner, and what was best, good Musique.
After dinner the young women went to dance - among others, Mr.
Chr. Pett his daughter, who is a very pretty modest girl — I am
mightily taken with her. And that being done, about 5 a-clock
home, very well pleased with the afternoon’s work. And so we
broke up mighty civilly, the bride and bridegroom going to
Greenwich (they keeping their dinner here only for my sake) to lie;
and we home- where! to the office. And anon am ona sudden called
to meet Sir W. Coventry andSir W. Penn at the Victualling Office,
which did put me out of order to be so surprized. But I went, and
there Sir W. Coventry did read mealetter from the Generalls to the
King, a most scurvy letter, reflecting most upon Sir W. Coventry,
and then upon me for my accounts (not that they are not true, but
that we do not consider the expense of the fleet), and then of the
whole office in neglecting them and the King’s service; and this in
very plain and sharp and menacing terms. I did give a good account
of matters, according to our computation of the expense of the fleet.
I find Sir W. Coventry willing enough to accept of anything to
confront the Generals. But a great supply must be made, and shall
be, in grace of God; but however, our accounts here will be found the
true ones. Having done here, and much work set me, I with greater
content home then Ithought Ishould have done; and so to the office
awhile, and then home anda while in my new closet, which delights
me every day more and more. And so late to bed.