1666-12-12

Up, and to the office, where some accounts of Mr. Gawdens
were examined. But I home most of the morning to even some
accounts with Sir H. Cholmly — Mr. Moone -—and others, one after
another. Sir H. Cholmly did with grief tell me how the Parliament
hath been told plainly that the King hath been heard to say that he
would dissolve them rather then pass this Bill with the Proviso. But
tells me that the Proviso is removed, and now carried that it shall be
done by a Bill by itself. He tells me how the King hath lately paid
above 30000! to clear debts of my Lady Castlemaynes — and that she
and her husband are parted for ever, upon good terms, never to
trouble one another more. He says that he hears that above 400000!
701
hath gone into the Privy purse since this Warr, and that that hath
consumed so much of our money and makes the King and Court so
mad to be brought to discover it. He gone, and after him the rest —I
to the office; and at noon to the Change, where the very good newes
is just come of our four ships from Smyrna come safe without
convoy even into the Downes, without seeing any enemy — which
is the best, and endeed only considerable good news to our
Exchange since the burningofthe City; and it is strange to see how
it doth cheer up men’s hearts. Here I saw shops now come to be in
this Exchange. And met little Batelier — who sits here, but at 3/ per
annum, whereas he sat at the other at 100] — which he says he
believes will prove of as good account to him now, as the other did
at that rent. From the Change to Capt. Cockes, and there by
agreement dined. And there was Charles Porter — Temple — Fenn —
De Busty (whose bad English and pleasant discourses was exceed-
ing good entertainment), Matt Wren — Maj. Cooper, and myself.
Mighty merry, and pretty discourse. They talked for certain that
now the King doth fallow Mrs. Steward wholly — and my Lady
Castlemayne not above once a week. That the Duke of York doth
not haunt my Lady Denham so much. That she troubles him with
matters of state, being of my Lord Bristoll’s faction, and that he
avoids. That she is ill still. After dinner I away to the office, where
we sat late upon Mr. Gaudens accounts — Sir
J.Mennes being gone
home sick. I late at the office, and then home to supper and to bed,
being mightily troubled with a pain in the small of my back,
through cold, or (which I think most true) by straining last night to
get open my plate chest. In such pain all night, I could not turn
myself in my bed. News this day from Brampton of Mr. Ensum,
my sister's sweetheart, being dead — a clowne.