1666-02-19

Atnoon by coach to St. Paul’s churchyard to my bookseller’s
and there bespoke a few more books, to bring all I have lately
bought to rol. Here I am told for certain, what Ihave heard once or
twice already, of a Jew in town, that in the name of the rest doth
offer to give any man tol, to be paid rool if a certain person now in
Smirna be within these two years owned by all the princes of the
East, and perticularly the Grand Segnor, as the King of the world,
in the same manner we do the King of England here, and that this
man is the true Messiah. One namedafriend of his that had received
ten pieces in gold upon this score, and says that the Jew hath
disposed of 1100/ in this manner — which is very strange; and
certainly this year of 1666 will bea year of great action, but what the
consequence of it will be, God knows. Thence to the Change, and
from my stationer’s thereabouts carried home by coach two books
of Ogilbys, his Asop and Coronacion, which fell to my lot at his
lottery; cost me 4l, besides the binding. So home. I find my wife
gone out to Hales her painter’s, andI after a little dinner do fallow
her, and there do find him at work, and with great content I do see it
will be a very rare picture. Left her there, and I to my Lord
Treasurer’s, where Sir G. Carteret and Sir
J.Mennes met me; and
before my Lord Treasurer and Duke of Albemarle, the state of our
Navy debts was laid open, being very great, and their want of
money to answer them openly professed — there being but 1500000!
to answer a certain expense and debt of 2300000/. Thence walked
with Fenn down to Whitehall, and there saw the Queene at Cards
with many ladies, but none of our beauties were there. But glad I
was to see the Queen so well, who looks prettily —- and methinks
hath more life then before, since it is confessed of all that she
miscarryed lately — Dr. Clerke telling me yesterday at Whitehall
that he had the membranes and other vessels in his hands which she
voided, and were perfect as ever woman’s was that bore a child.