1666-09-06

Up about 5 a-clock, and there met Mr. Gawden at the gate of
the office (Ientending to go out, as Iused every now and then to do,
to see how the fire is) to call our men to Bishoppsgate, where no fire
had yet been near, and there is now one broke out — which did give
great grounds to people, and to me too, to think that there is some
kind of plott in this (on which many by this time have been taken,
and it hath been dangerous for any stranger to walk in the streets);
but I went with the men and we did put it out in a little time, so that
that was well again. It was pretty to see how hard the women did
work in the cannells sweeping of water; but then they would scold
for drink and be as drunk as devils. I saw good Butts of sugar broke
open in the street, and peopie go and take handfuls out and put into
beer and drink it. And now all being pretty well, I took boat and
over to Southwarke, and took boat on the other side the bridge and
so to Westminster, thinking to Shift myself, being all in dirt from
top to bottom. But could not there find any place to buya Shirt or
666
pair of gloves, Westminster hall being full of people’s goods — those
in Westminster having removed all their goods, and the Exchequer
money put into vessels to carry to Nonsuch. But to the Swan, and
there was trimmed. And then to Whitehall, but saw nobody, and so
home. A sad sight to see how the River looks — no houses nor
church near it to the Temple — where it stopped. At home did go
with Sir W. Batten and our neighbour Knightly (who, with one
more, was the only man of any fashion left in all the neighbourhood
hereabouts, they all removing their goods and leaving their houses
to the mercy of the fire) to Sir R. Ford’s, and there dined, in an
earthen platter a fried breast of mutton, a great many ofus. But very
merry; and endeed as good a meal, though as ugly a one, as ever I
had in my life. Thence down to Deptford, and there with great
satisfaction landed all my goods at Sir G. Carteret’s, safe, and
nothing missed I could see, or hurt. This being done to my great
content, I home; and to Sir W. Batten’s and there with Sir R. Ford,
Mr. Knightly, and one Withers, a professed lying rogue, supped
well; and mighty merry and our fears over. From them to the office
and there slept, with the office full of labourers, who talked and
slept and walked all night long there. But strange it was to see
Cloathworkers hall on fire these three days and nights in one body
of Flame — it being the cellar, full of Oyle.