1666-03-28

Ashwendsday. Up, and after doing a little business at my
office, I walked (it being a most curious dry and cold morning) to
Whitehall; and there I went into the parke, and meeting Sir Ph.
Warwicke, took a turn with him in the Pell Mell, talking of the
melancholy posture of affairs, where everybody is snarling one at
another, and all things put together look ominously. This new
Act,’ too, putting us out ofa power of raising money — so that he
fears as I do, but is fearful of enlarging in that discourse ofa whole
confusion in everything, and the State and all. We appointed
another time to meet to talk of the business of the Navy alone,
seriously, and so parted and I to Whitehall; and there we did our
business with the Duke of Yorke, and so parted and walked to
Westminster hall, where I stayed talking with Mrs. Michell and
Howlett long, and her daughter, which is become a mighty pretty
woman; and thence, going out of the hall, was called to by Mrs.
Martin. So I went to her, and bought two bands and so parted, and
by and by met at her chamber and there did what I would; and so
away home, and there find Mrs. Knipp and we dined together, she
the pleasantest company in the world. After dinner I did give my
wife money to lay out on Knipp, 20s., and I abroad to Whitehall to
visit Coll. Norwood and then Sir G. Carteret, with whom I have
brought myself right again, and he very open to me. Is very
melancholy, and matters, I fear, go down with him; but he seems
most afeared of a general catastrophe to the whole Kingdom, and
thinks, as I fear, that all things will come to nothing. Thence to the
Palace yard to the Swan and there stayed till it was dark; and then to
Mrs. Lanes and there lent her $/, upon 4/ ors. in gold — and then did
what I would with her; and Iperceive she is come to be very bad and
offers anything, that it is dangerous to have to do with her; nor will
I see any more a good while. Thence by coach home and to the
office, where a while; and then betimes to bed, by 10 a-clock,
sooner then I have done many a day. And thus ends this month,
with my mind full of resolution to apply myself better, from this
time forward, to my business then I have done within these six or
eight days — visibly to my prejudice, both in quiet of mind and
1. The ‘Additional Aid’.
$93
1666 28 February—2 March
setting backward of my business, that I cannot give a good account
of it as I ought to do.
—%*MARCH#-
1. Up, and to the office and there all the morning sitting; and at
noon to dinner with my Lord Brouncker, Sir W. Batten, and Sir W.
Penn at the White Horse in Lumbard street — where, God forgive
us, good sport with Capt. Cockes having his maid sick of the
plague a day or two ago, and sent to the pest-house, where she now
is — but he will not say anything but that she is well. But, blessed be
God, a good Bill this week we have — being but 237 in all, and 42 of
the plague, and of them, but 6 in the City — though my Lord
Brouncker says that these 6 are most of them in new parishes,
where they were not the last week. Here was with us also Mr.
Williamson, who the more I know, the more I honour. Thence I
slipped after dinner without notice home, and there close to my
business at my office till 12 at night, having with great comfort
returned to my business by some fresh vows, in addition to my
former and more severe; and a great joy it is to me to see myself ina
good disposition to business. So home to supper, and to my
journall and to bed.
2. Up, asI have of late resolved, before 7 in the morning, and to
the office, where all the morning; among other things, setting my
wife and Mercer with much pleasure to work upon the ruling of
some paper for the making of books for pursers, which will require
a great deal of work, and they will earn a good deal of money by it-
the hopes of which makes them work mighty hard. At noon dined,
and to the office again; and 2bout 4 a-clock took coach and to my
Lord Treasurer’s, and thence to Sir Ph. Warwicke’s new house by
appointment, there to spend an hour in talking; and we were
together above an hour, and very good discourse about the state of
the King as to money, and perticularly, in that point, of the Navy.
He endeavours hard to come to a good understanding of Sir. G.
Carteret’s accounts. And by his discourse, I find Sir G. Carteret
must be brought to it, and he is a madman that he doth not do it of
himself, for the King expects the Parliament will call upon him for
his promise of giving an account of the money, and he will be ready
$94
for it, which cannot be, I am sure, without Sir G. Carteret’s
accounts be better understood then they are. Thence by coach,
calling at my bookseller’s, and carried home 1o/-worth of books, all
[hopeI shall buy a great while. There by appointment find Mr. Hill
come to sup and take his last leave of me;" and by and by in comes
Mr. James Houbland to bear us company, a man I love mightily,
and will not lose his acquaintance. He told me in my eare this night
what he and his brothers have resolved to give me, which is 200! for
helping them out with two or three ships — a good sum, and that
which I did believe they would give me, and I did expect little less.
Here we talked, and very good company till late, and then took
leave of one another; and endeed I am heartily sorry for Mr. Hill’s
leaving us — for he is a very worthy gentleman, as most I know —
God give him a good voyage and success in his business. Thus we
parted, and my wife andI to bed, heavy for the loss of our friend.