1666-05-08

Up and to the office all the morning. At noon dined at home —
my wife’s cheek bad still. After dinner to the office again; and
thither comes Mr. Downing the Anchor-smith, who had given me
50 pieces in gold the last month to speak for him to Sir W. Coventry
for his being smith at Deptford. But after I had got it granted him,
he finds himself not fit to go on with it, so lets it fall — so hath no
benefit of my motion; I therefore in honour and conscience took
him home, and though much to my grief, did yet willingly and
forcibly force him to take it again, the poor man having no mind to
have it. However, I made him take it, and away he went; andI glad I
had given him so much cause to speak well of me. So to my office
again late; and then home to supper to a good lobster with my wife;
and then alittle to my office again; and so to bed.
g. Up by 5 a-clock, which I have not along time done, and down
the river by water to Deptford; among other things, to examine the
state of Ironworke, in order to the doing something with reference
to Downing that may induce him to return me the $0 pieces.
Walked back again, reading of my civil law book. And so home and
by coach to Whitehall, where we did our usual business before the
Duke — and heard the Duke commend Deane’s ship, the Rupert,
before the Defyance, built lately by Castle, in hearing of Sir W.
Batten, which pleased me mightily. Thence by water to West-
minster and there looked after my Tanger Order; and so by coach
to Mrs. Pierces, thinking to have gone to Hales’s; but she was
not ready, so away home and to dinner. So away to my Lord
Treasurer’s; and thence to Pierces, where I find Knipp and J took
them to Hales’s to see our pictures finished; which are very pretty,
but I like not hers half so well as I thought at first, it being not so
like, nor so well painted as I expected or as mine and my wife’s are.
Thence with them to Cornehill to call and choose a chimney-piece
for Pierce’s closet; and so home, where my wife in mighty pain, and
mightily vexed at my being abroad with these women — and when
they were gone, called them “‘whores”’ and I know not what; which
vexed me, having been so innocent with them. So I with them to
Mrs. Turner’s and there sat with them a while; anon my wife sends
for me; I come, and what was it but to scold at me, and she would
go abroad to take the ayre presently, that she would. So I left my
company and went with her to Bow, but was vexed and spoke not
one word to her all the way, going nor coming — or being come
home; but went up straight to bed. Half an hour after (she in the
615
coach leaning on me, as being desirous to be friends), she comes up,
mighty sick with a fit of the Cholique and in mighty pain, and calls
for me out of the bed; I rose and held her; she prays me to forgive
her, and in mighty pain we put her to bed— where the pain ceased by
and by; and so had some sparagus to our beds-side for supper, and
very kindly afterward to sleep, and good friends in the morning.