1666-09-29

To St James’s, and there Sir W. Coventry took Sir W. Penn
658
29 August—2 September 1666
and me apart and read to us his answer to the Generalls letter to the
King that he read last night; wherein he is very plain, and states the
matter in full defence of himself, and of me with him, which he
could not avoid — which is a good comfort to me, that Ihappen to be
involved with him in the same cause. And then speaking of the
supplies which have been made to this fleet, more then ever in all
kinds to any, even that wherein the Duke of York himself was —
“Well,” says he, “if this will not do, I will say, as Sir
J.Falstaffe did
to the Prince — ‘Tell your father, that if he do not like this, let him
kill the next Piercy himself.’”’ And so we broke up, and to the Duke
and there did our usual business.
—* SEPTEMBER4-
2. Lords day. Some of our maids sitting up late last night to get
things ready against our feast today, Jane called us up, about 3 in the
morning, to tell us of great fire they saw in the City. So Irose, and
slipped on my nightgown and went to her window, and thought it
to be on the back side of Markelane at the furthest; but being unused
to such fires as fallowed, I thought it far enough off, and so went to
bed again and to sleep. About 7 rose again to dress myself, and there
looked out at the window and saw the fire not so much as it was,
and further off. So to my closet to set things to rights after
yesterday’s cleaning. By and by Jane comes and tells me that she
hears that above 300 houses have been burned down tonight by the
fire we saw, and that it was now burning down all Fishstreet by
London Bridge. So I made myself ready presently, and walked to
the Tower and there got up upon one of the high places, Sir J.
Robinsons little son going up with me; and there Idid see the houses
at that end of the bridge all on fire, and an infinite great fire on this
and the other side the end of the bridge — which, among other
people, did trouble me for poor little Michell and our Sarah on the
Bridge. So down, with my heart full of trouble, to the Lieutenant of
the Tower, who tells me that it begun this morning in the King’s
bakers house in Pudding lane, and that it hath burned down St.
Magnes Church and most part ofFishstreete already. So 1 down to
the waterside and there got a boat and through the bridge, and there
saw a lamentable fire. Poor Michells house, as far as the Old Swan,
already burned that way and the fire running further, that in a very
659
1666 2 September
little time it got as far as the Stillyard while I was there. Everybody
endeavouring to remove their goods, and flinging into the River or
bringing them into lighters that lay off. Poor people staying in their
houses as long as till the very fire touched them, and then running
into boats or clambering from one pair of stair by the waterside to
another. And among other things, the poor pigeons Iperceive were
loath to leave their houses, but hovered about the windows and
balconies till they were some of them burned, their wings, and fell
down.
Having stayed, and in an hour’s time seen the fire rage every way,
and nobody to my sight endeavouring to quench it, but to remove
their godds and leave all to the fire; and having seen it get as far as
the Steeleyard, and the wind mighty high and driving it into the
city, and everything, after so long a drougth, proving combustible,
even the very stones of churches, and among other things, the poor
steeple by which pretty Mrs. [Horsley] lives, and whereof my old
schoolfellow Elborough is parson, taken fire in the very top and
there burned till it fall down—I to Whitehall with a gentleman with
me who desired to go off from the Tower to see the fire in my boat—
to Whitehall, and there up to the King’s closet in the chapel, where
people came about me and I did give them an account dismayed
them all; and word was carried in to the King, so Iwas called for and
did tell the King and Duke of York what I saw, and that unless his
Majesty did command houses to be pulled down, nothing could
stop the fire. They seemed much troubled, and the King com-
manded me to go to my Lord Mayor from him and command him
to spare no houses but to pull down before the fire every way. The
Duke of York bid me tell him that if he would have any more
soldiers, he shall; and so did my Lord Arlington afterward, as a
great secret. Here meeting with Capt. Cocke, I in his coach, which
he lent me, and Creed with me, to Pauls; and there walked along
Watling street as well as I could, every creature coming away
loaden with goods to save — and here and there sick people carried
away in beds. Extraordinary good goods carried in carts and on
backs. At last met my Lord Mayor in Canning Streete, like a man
spent, with a handkercher about his neck. To the King’s message,
he cried like a fainting woman, “Lord, what can I do? I am spent!
People will not obey me. I have been pull[ing] down houses. But
the fire overtakes us faster then we can do it.”’ That he needed no
more soldiers; and that for himself, he must go and refresh himself,
having been up all night. So he left me, and Ihim, and walked home
660
2 September 1666
— seeing people all almost distracted and no manner of means used
to quench the fire. The houses too, so very thick thereabouts, and
full of matter for burning, as pitch and tar, in Thames street — and
warehouses of oyle and wines and Brandy and other things. Here I
saw Mr. Isaccke Houblon, that handsome man — prettily dressed
and dirty at his door at Dowgate, receiving some of his brothers
things whose houses were on fire; and as he says, have been
removed twice already, and he doubts (as it soon proved) that they
must be ina little time removed from his house also — which was a
sad consideration. And to see the churches all filling with goods, by
people who themselfs should have been quietly there at this time.
By this time it was about 12 a-clock, andso home and there find my
guests, which was Mr. Wood and his wife, Barbary Shelden, and
also Mr. Moone-she mighty fine, and her husband, for aughtIsee,
a likely man. But Mr. Moones design and mine, which was to look
over my closet and please him with the sight thereof, which he hath
long desired, was wholly disappointed, for we were in great trouble
and disturbance at this fire, not knowing what to think of it.
However, we had an extraordinary good dinner, and as merry as at
this time we could be. While at dinner, Mrs. Batelier came to
enquire after Mr. Woolfe and Stanes (who it seems are related to
them), whose houses in Fishstreet are all burned, and they in a sad
condition. She would not stay in the fright.
As soon as dined, I and Moone away and walked through the
City, the streets full of nothing but people and horses and carts
loaden with goods, ready to run over one another, and removing
goods from one burned house to another — they now removing out
of Canning street (which received goods in the morning) into
Lumbard Streete and further; and among others, I now saw my
little goldsmith Stokes receiving some friend’s goods, whose house
itself was burned the day after. We parted at Pauls, he home andI to
Pauls Wharf, where Ihad appointed a boat to attend me; and took in
Mr. Carcasse and his brother, whom I met in the street, and carried
them below and above bridge, to and again, to see the fire, which
was now got further, both below and above, and no likelihood of
stopping it. Met with the King and Duke of York in their Barge,
and with them to Queen Hith and there called Sir Rd. Browne to
them. Their order was only to pull down houses apace, and so
below bridge at the waterside; but little was or could be done, the
fire coming upon them so fast. Good hopes there was of stopping it
at the Three Cranes above, and at Buttolphs Wharf below bridge, if
661
1666 2 September
care be used; but the wind carries it into the City, so as we know not
by the waterside what it doth there. River full of lighter[s] and boats
taking in goods, and good goods swimming in the water; and only,
I observed that hardly one lighter or boat in three that had goods of
a house in, but there was a pair of virginalls in it. Having seen as
much as I could now, I away to Whitehall by appointment, and
there walked to St. James’s Park, and there met my wife and Creed
and Wood and his wife and walked to my boat, and there upon the
water again, and to the fire up and down, it still increasing and the
wind great. So near the fire as we could for smoke; and all over the
Thames, with one’s face in the wind you were almost burned witha
showerof Firedrops — this is very true—so as houses were burned by
these drops and flakes of fire, three or four, nay five or six houses,
one from another. When we could endure no more upon the water,
we to a little alehouse on the Bankside over against the Three
Cranes, and there stayed till it was dark almost and saw the fire
grow; and as it grow darker, appeared more and more, and in
Corners and upon steeples and between churches and houses, as far
as we could see up the hill of the City, in a most horrid malicious
bloody flame, not like the fine flame of an ordinary fire. Barbary
and her husband away before us. We stayed till, it being darkish, we
saw the fire as only one entire arch of fire from this to the other side
of the bridge, and in a bow up the hill, for an arch of above a mile
long. It made me weep to see it. The churches, houses, and all on
fire and flaming at once, and a horrid noise the flames made, and the
cracking of houses at their ruine.
So home with a sad heart, and there find everybody discoursing
and lamenting the fire; and poor Tom Hater came with some few of
his goods saved out of his house, which is burned upon Fish street
hill. I invited him to lie at my house, and did receive his goods: but
was deceived in his lying there, the noise coming every moment of
the growthof the Fire, so as we were forced to begin to pack up our
own goods and prepare for their removal. And did by Mooneshine
(it being brave, dry, and moonshine and warm weather) carry
much of my goods into the garden, and Mr. Hater and I did remove
my money and Iron chests into my cellar—as thinking that the safest
place. And got my bagsofgold into my office ready to carry away,
and my chief papers of accounts also there, and my tallies into a box
by themselfs. So great was our fear, as Sir W. Batten had carts come
out of the country to fetch away his goods this night. We did put
Mr. Hater, poor man, to beda little; but he got but very little rest,
662
so much noise being in my house, taking down of goods.