1667-05-21

Upand to the office, where sat all the morning. At noon dined
at home with my wife, and find anew girle, a good big girl, come to
us, got by Payne to be our girl; and his daughter Nell we make our
cook. This wench’s name is Mary — and seems a good likely maid.
After dinner, I with Mr. Comander amd Mr. Hide’s brother to
Lincoln’s Inne Fields, and there viewed several coach-houses and
satisfied ourselfs now fully in it. And then there parted, leaving the
rest to future discourse between us. Thence, Ihome; but Lord, how
it went against my heart to go away from the very door of the
Duke’s playhouse, and my Lady Castlemayns coach and many
great coaches there to see The Siege of Rhodes; | was very near
making a forfeit, but I did command myself; and so home to my
office and there did much business to my good content, much
better then going to a play; and then home to my wife, who is not
well with her cold, and sat and read [a] piece of Grand Cyrus in
English by her; and then to my chamber and to supper, and so to
bed. This evening, after I came from the office, Mrs. Turner came
to see my wife and me and sit and talk with us; and so my wife not
being well and going to bed, Mrs. Turner and Isat up till 12 at night
talking alone in my chamber, and most of our discourse was of our
neighbours. As to my Lord Brouncker, she says how Mrs. Griffin,
our housekeeper’s wife, hath it from his maid, that comes to her
house often, that they are very poor; that the other day Mrs.
Williams was fain to send a jewell to pawn. That they have a most
lewd and nasty family here in the office; but Mrs. Turner doth tell
me that my Lord hath put the King to infinite charge since his
coming thither, in alterations; and perticularly, that Mr. Harper at
Deptford did himself tell her that my Lord hath had of Foly the
ironmonger $o/-worth in locks and keys for his house, and that it is
from the fineness of them, having some of 4 and 5/ a lock, such as is
in ladies closets; that he hath several of these. That Mrs. Griffin doth
say that he doth not keep Mrs. Williams now for love, but need, he
having another whore that he keeps in Covent garden. That they do
owe money everywhere, almost for everything; even Mrs. Ship-
man for her butter and cheese about 3/, and after many demands
cannot get it.
Then we fall to talk of Sir W. Penn and his family and rise. She
774
says that he was apitiful [fellow] when she first knew them. That
his lady was one of the sorriest, dirty women that ever she saw.
That his rise hath been his giving of large Bribes, wherein (and she
agrees with my opinion and knowledge before therein) he is very
profuse. That long ago endeed, he would drink the King’s health
privately with Mr. Turner; but that when he saw it fit to turn
Roundhead, and was offered by Mr. Turner to drink the King’s
health, he answered no, he was changed, and now he that would
make him drink the King’s health, or any health but the Protectors
and the State’s (or to that purpose), he would be the first man
should sheath his sword in his guts. That at the King’s coming in,
he did send for her husband and told him what a great man Sir W.
Coventry was like to be; and that he having all the records in his
hands of the Navy, ifhe would transcribe what was of most present
use of the practice of the Navy, and give them him to give Sir W.
Coventry from him, it would undoubtedly do his business of
getting him a Principal Officer’s place. That he was the last war a
most devilish plunderer, and that got him his estate which he hath
in Ireland, and nothing else; and that he hath always been a very
liberal man in his bribes. That upon his coming into this part of the
Controller’s business wherein he is, he did send for T. Willson and
told him how against his knowledge he was put in, and had so little
wit as to say to him, “This will make the pot boyle, will it not, Mr.
Willson? will it not make the pot boil?” and doth offer him to come
in and do his business for him, and he would reward him. Upon the
whole, she told me stories enough to confirm me that he is the most
false fellow that ever was born of woman, and that so she thinks and
knows him to be.