1667-06-14

A man of Mr. Gawden’s came from Chatham last night and
saw the three ships burnt, they lying all dry, and boats going from
the men-of-war and fire them. But that that he tells me of worst
consequence is that he himself (I think he said) did hear many
Englishmen on board the Dutch ships, speaking to one another in
English, and that they did cry and say, “We did heretofore fight for
tickets; now we fight for Dollers!’’ and did ask how such and such a
one did, and would commend themself to them — which is a sad
consideration. And several seamen came this morning to me to tell
me that if I would get their tickets paid, they would go and do all
they could against the Dutch; but otherwise they would not venture
being killed and lose all they have already fought for — so that I was
forced to try what I could do to get them paid. And endeed, the
hearts as well as affections of the seamen are turned away; and in the
790
14 June 1667
Open streets in wapping, and up and down, the wifes have cried
publicly, ““This comes of your not paying our husbands; and now
your work is undone, or done by hands that understand it not;”’ and
Sir W. Batten told me that he was himself affronted with a woman
in language of this kind himself on tower hill publicly yesterday;
and we are fain to bear it — and to keep one at the office-door to let
no idle people in, for fear of firing of the office and doing us
mischief. The City is troubled at their [trainbands] being put upon
duty: summoned one hour and discharged two hours after and then
again summoned two hours after that, to their great charge as well
as trouble; and Pelling the pothecary tells me the world says all over
that less charge then what the kingdom is put to, of one kind or
other, by this business, would have set out all our great ships. It is
said they did in open streets yesterday, at Westminster, cry, “A
Parliament! a Parliament!’’; and do believe it will cost blood to
answer for these miscarriages. We do not hear that the Duch are
come to Gravesend, which is a wonder; but a wonderful thing it is
that to this day we have not one word yet from Brouncker or P. Pett
or
J.Mennes of anything at Chatham; the people that come hither
to hear how things go make me ashamed to be found unable to
answer them, for I am left alone here at the office; and the truth is, I
am glad my station is to be here — near my own home and out of
danger, yet in a place of doing the King good service.
I have this morning good news from Gibson; three letters, from
three several stages, that he was safe last night as far as Royston at
between 9 and 10 at night. The dismay that is upon us all in the
business of the kingdom and Navy at this day, is not to be expressed
otherwise then by the condition the citizens were in when the City
was on fire, nobody knowing which way to turn themselfs, while
everything concurred to greaten the fire; as here, the easterly gale
and spring-tides, for coming up both rivers and enabling them to
break the chain. D. Gawden did tell me yesterday that the day
before at the Council, they were ready to fall together by the ears at
the council-table, arraigning one another of being guilty of the
counsel that brought us into this misery, by laying up all the great
ships. Mr. Hater tells me at noon that some rude people have been,
as he hears, at my Lord Chancellor’s, where they have cut down the
trees before his house and broke his windows; and a Gibbet either
set up before or painted upon his gate, and these words writ —
“Three sights to be seen; Dunkirke, Tanger, and a barren Queen.”’
It gives great matter of talk that it is said there is at this hour in the
791
1667 14 June
Exchequer as much money as is ready to break down the floor. This
arises, I believe, from Sir G. Downing’s late talk of the greatness of
the sum lying there of people’s money that they would not fetch
away, which he showed me and a great many others. Most people
that I speak with are in doubt how we shall do to secure our seamen
from running over to the Duch; which is a sad but very true
consideration at this day. At noon am told that my Lord Duke of
Albemarle is made Lord High Constable; the meaning whereof at
this time I know not, nor whether it be true or no. Dined, and Mr.
Hater and W. Hewer with me; where they do speak very
sorrowfully of the posture of the times, and how people do cry out
in the streets of their being bought and sold; and both they and
everybody that come to me do tell me that people make nothing of
talking treason in the streets openly: as, that we are bought and sold
and governed by Papists and that we are betrayed by people about
the King and shall be delivered up to the French, and I know not
what. At dinner we discoursed of Tom-of-the-Wood, a fellow that
lives like a Hermit near Woolwich, who as they say (and Mr.
Bodham, they tell me, affirms that he was by at the Justice’s when
some did accuse him there for it) [did] foretell the burning of the
City, now says that a greater desolation is at hand. Thence we read
and laughed at Lillys prophecies this month — in his almanac this
year. So to the office after dinner; and thither comes Mr. Pierce,
who tells me his condition: how he cannot get his money (about
sool, which he says is a very great part of what he hath for his family
and children) out of Viner’s hand—and endeed, it is to be feared that
this will wholly undo the banquiers. He says he knows nothing of
the late affronts to my Lord Chancellors house as is said, nor hears
of the Duke of Albemarle’s being made High Constable; but says
that they are in great distraction at Whitehall — and that everywhere
people do speak high against Sir W. Coventry; but he agrees with
me that he is the best Minister of State the King hath, and so from
my heart I believe.
At night came home Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Penn, who only
can tell me that they have placed guns at Woolwich and Deptford
and sunk some ships below Woolwich and Blackwall, and are in
hopes that they will stop the enemy’s coming up. But strange our
confusion; that among them that are sunk they have gone and sunk
without consideration the Franckin, one of the King’s ships, with
stores to a very considerable value, that hath been long loaden for
supply of the ships and the new ship at Bristoll, and much wanted
792
14 June 1667
there — and nobody will own that they directed it, but do lay it on
Sir W. Rider; they speak also of another ship, loaden to the value of
8000o0/, sunk with the goods in her, or at least was mighily
contended for by him, and a foreign ship that had the faith of the
nation for her security; this Sir R. Ford tells us. And it is too plain a
truth, that both here and at Chatham the ships that we have sunk
have many, and the first of them, been ships completely fitted for
fireships at great charge. But most strange, the backwardness and
disorder of all people, especially the King’s people in pay, to do any
work (Sir W. Penn tells me), all crying out for money. And it was
so at Chatham, that this night comes an order from Sir W.
Coventry to stop the pay of the wages of that Yard, the Duke of
Albemarle having related that not above three of 1100 in pay there
did attend to do any work there. This evening, having sent a
messenger to Chatham on purpose, we have received a dull letter
from my Lord Brouncker and P. Pett how matters have gone there
this week; but not so much, or so perticular as we knew it by
common talk before, and as true. I doubt they will be found to have
been but slow men in this business; and they say the Duke of
Albemarle did tell my Lord Brouncker to his face that his
discharging of the great ships there was the cause of all this; and lam
told that it is become common talk against my Lord Brouncker, but
in that he is to be
justified, for he did it by verball order from Sir W.
Coventry, and with good intent; and was to good purpose,
whatever the success* be, for the men would have but spent the
King so much the more in wages, and yet not attended on board to
have done the King any service. And this morning also, some of the
Cambriges men came up from Portsmouth by order from Sir Fre.
Hollis, who boasted to us the other day that he had sent for 50, and
would be hanged if roo did not come up, that would do as much as
twice the number of other men: I say some of them, instead of
being
at work at Deptford where they were intended, do come to the
office this morning to demand the payment of their tickets, for
otherwise they would, they said, do no more work; and are, as I
understand from everybody that have do with them, the most
debauched, damning, swearing rogues that ever were in the Navy,
just like their profane commander. So to W. Batten’s to sit and talk
a little; and then home to my flagelette, my heart being at pretty
good ease by aletter from my wife, brought by Saunders, that my
father and wife got well last night to their Inne and out again this
morning, and Gibson’s being got safe to Caxton at 12 last night. So
793
to supper, and then to bed. No news today of any motion of the
enemy, either upwards towards Chatham or this way.