1667-11-29

Waked about 7 a-clock this morning with a noise I supposed I
heard near our chamber, of knocking, which by and by increased,
and Imore awake, could distinguish it better; Ithen waked my wife
and both of us wondered at it, and lay so a great while, while that
encreased; and at last heard it plainer, knocking as if it were
breaking down a window for people to get out— and then removing
of stools and chairs, and plainly by and by going up and down our
stairs. We lay both of us afeared; yet I would have rose, but my wife
would not let me; besides, I could not do it without making noise;
and we did both conclude that thiefs were in the house, but
wondered what our people did, whom we thought either killed or
afeared as we were. Thus we lay till the clock struck 8, and high
day. At last Iremoved my gown and slippers safely to the other side
of the bed over my wife, and there safely rose and put on my gown
and breeches, and then witha firebrand in my hand safely opened
the door, and saw nor heard anything. Then (with fear, I confess)
went to the maid’s chamber-door, and all quiet and safe. Called Jane
up, and went down safely and opened my chamber, where all well.
Then more.freely about, and to the kitchen, where the cook-maid
up and all safe. So up again, and when Jane came and we demanded
whether she heard no noise, she said, “‘Yes, and was afeared,”’ but
rose with the other maid and found nothing, but heard a noise in the
850
great stack of chimneys that goes from Sir
J.Mennes’s through our
house; and so we sent, and their chimneys have been swept this
morning, and the noise was that and nothing else. It is one of the
most extraordinary accidents in my life, and gives ground to think
of Don Quixot’s adventures how people may be surprized— and the
more from an accident last night, that our young gibb-cat did leap
down our stairs from top to bottom at two leaps and frighted us,
that we could not tell well whether it was the cat or a spirit, and do
sometimes think this morning that the house might be haunted.
Glad to have this so well over, and endeed really glad in my mind,
for I was much afeared. I dressed myself, and to the office both
forenoon and afternoon, mighty hard putting papers and things in
order to my extraordinary satisfaction, and consulting my clerks in
many things, who are infinite helps to my memory and reasons of
things. And so, being weary and my eyes akeing, having over-
wrought them today reading so much shorthand, I home and there
to supper, it being late, and to bed.