1667-03-22

Up and by coach to Sir Ph. Warwicke about business for
Tanger, about money. And then to Sir St. Fox to give him account
of
a little service Ihave done him about money coming to him from
our office; and then to Lovetts and saw a few baubling things of
their doing, which are very pretty; but the quality of the people,
living only by shifts, doth not please me, that it makes me I do no
more care for them, nor shall have more acquaintance with them
after I have got my Lady Castlemaine’s picture home. So to
Whitehall, where the King at chapel; and I would not stay, but to
Westminster to Herbert’s and there, he being not well, I sent for a
quart of claret and burnt it and drank, and had a besado or three or
743
four of Sarah, whom yo trouvais aqui; and so by coach to Sir Rob.
Viner’s about my accounts with him; and so to the Change, where I
hear for certain that we are going on with our treaty of peace, and
that we are to treat at Bredah. But this our condescension people do
think will undo us—and I do much fear it. So home to dinner, where
my wife having dressed herself ina silly dress, of a blue petticoat
uppermost and a white satin waistcoat and white hood (though I
think she did it because her gown is gone to the tailor’s) did,
together with my being hungry (which always makes me peevish),
make me angry. But when my belly was full, was friends again, and
dined and then by water down to Greenwich and thence walked to
Woolwich, all the way reading Playfords Introduction to Musique,
wherein are some things very pretty. At Woolwich I did much
business, taking an account of the state of the ships there under
hand; thence to Blackewall and did the like for two ships we have
repairing there; and then to Deptford and did the like there; and so
home, Capt. Perriman with me from Deptford, telling me many
perticulars how the King’s business is ill ordered; and indeed so they
are, God knows. So home and to the office, where did business; and
so home to my chamber, and then to supper and to bed.