1667-02-17

Lords day. Up, and called at Michell’s and took him and his
wife and carried them to Westminster, I landing at Whitehall and
having no pleasure in the way con ella; and so to the Duke’s, where
we all met and had a hot encounter before the Duke of York about
the business of our payments at the Ticket Office; where we urged
that we had nothing to do to be troubled with the pay, having
examined the tickets. Besides, we are neglected, having not money
sent us in time. But to see the baseness of my brethren, not a man
almost put in a word but Sir W. Coventry, though at the office like
very devils in this point. But I did plainly declare that without
money no fleet could be expected, and desired the Duke of York to
take noticeof[it] and notice was taken of it — but I doubt will do no
good. But I desire to remember it as a most prodigious thing that to
this day my Lord Treasurer hath not consulted counsel (which Sir
W. Coventry and I and others do think is necessary) about the late
Pole act, enough to put the same into such order as that anybody
dare lend money upon it, though we have from this office under our
hands related the necessity thereof to the Duke of York. Nor was
like to be determined in, for aught I see, a good while, had not Sir
W. Coventry plainly said that he did believe it would be a better
work for the King then going to church this morning, to send for
the Atturny Generall to meet at the Lord Treasurer’s this afternoon
and to bring the thing to an issue, saying that himself, were he
going to the Sacrament, would not think he should offend God to
leave it and go to the ending this work, so much it is of moment to
the King and Kingdom. Hereupon the Duke of York said he would
presently speak to the King, and cause it to be done this afternoon.
Having done here, we broke up, having done nothing almost
though, for all this; and by and by I met Sir G. Carteret, and he is
726
17 February 1667
stark mad at what hath passed this morning, andI believe is heartily
vexed with me. I said little, but I am sure the King will suffer if
some better care be not taken then he takes to look after this
business of money. So parted, and I by water home and to dinner,
W. Hewer with us; a good dinner and very merry, my wife and I;
and after dinner, to my chamber to fit something against the
Council anon; and that being done, away to Whitehall by water and
thence to my Lord Chancellors, where I met with and had much
pretty discourse with one of the Progers’s that knows me. And it
was pretty to hear him tell me of his own accord, as a matter of no
shame, that in Spain he had a pretty woman his mistress; whom,
when money grew scarce with him, he was forced to leave, and
afterward heard how she and her husband lived well, she being kept
by an old Fryer who used her as his whore; but this, says he, is better
then as our Ministers do, who have wifes that lay up their estates
and do no good nor relieve any poor; no, not our greatest prelates —
and I think he is in the right for my part.
Stayed till the Council was up, and attended the King and Duke
of York round the park and was asked several Questions by both;
but I was in pain lest they should ask me what I could not answer; as
the Duke of York did the value of the hull of the St. Patricke, lately
lost; which I told him Icould not presently answer — though I might
have easily furnished myself to answer all those Questions. They
stood a good while to see the ganders and geese tread one another in
the water, the goose being all the while kept for a great while quite
under water, which was new to me; but they did make mighty
Sport at it, saying (as the King did often), ““Now you shall see a
marriage between this and that” — which did not please me. They
gone by coach to my Lord Treasurer’s, as the Duke of York told
me, to settle the business of money for the Navy; I walked into the
Court to and again till night, and then met Coll. Reames and he and
I walked together a great while, complaining ofthe ill-management
of things, whereof he is as full as 1am. We run over many persons
and things, and see nothing done like men like to do well while the
King minds his pleasures so much. We did bemoan it that nobody
would or had authority enough with the King to tell him how all
things go to wrack and will be lost. Then he andI parted, and I to
Westminster to the Swan, and there stayed till Michell and his wife
came. Old Michell and his wife came to see me, and there we drank
and laughedalittle; and then the young ones and I| took boat, it
being fine moonshine. | did to my trouble see all the way that ella
727
did get as close a su marido as ella could, and turn her manos away
quando yo did endeavour take one de los — so that I had no pleasure
at all con ella ce night. When we landed, I did take occasion to send
him back a the bateau while I did get un baiser or two, and would
have taken la by la hand; but ella did turn away, and quandoI said
‘Shall I not tocar te?” answered “‘Yo no love touching”, ina
slight
modo. I seemed not to take notice of it, but parted kindly et su
marido did andar with me almost a mi casa, and there parted; and so
I home, troubled at this; but I think I shall make good useof it and
mind my business more. This evening, going to the Queen’s side to
see the ladies, I did find the Queene, the Duchess of York, and
another or two at Cards, with the room full of great ladies and men
— which I was amazed at to see on a Sunday, having not believed it;
but contrarily, flatly denied the same a little while since to my
Cosen Roger Pepys. I did this day, going by water, read the
Answer to the Apology for Papists, which did like me mightily, it
being a thing as well writ as I think most things that ever I read in
my life, and glad I am thatI read it.