1667-02-14

After dinnner by coach to my Lord Chancellor’s, and there a
meeting — the Duke of York — the Duke of Albemarle — and several
other Lords of the Commission of Tanger; and there I did present a
state of my accounts, and managed them well; and my Lord
Chancellor did say, though he was in other things in an ill humour,
that no man in England was of more method nor made himself
better understood then myself. Thence away by coach with Sir
H. Cholmly and Fitzgerald and Creed, setting down the two
latter at the New Exchange; and H. Cholmly and I to the Temple
and there walked in the dark in the walks, talking of news; and he
surprizes me with the certain news that the King did last night in
council declare his being in Treaty with the Dutch. God therefore
give a good end to it, for I doubt it; and yet do much more doubt
the issue of our continuing the war, for we are in no wise fit for
it. And yet it troubles me to think what Sir H. Cholmly says,
that he believes they will not give us any reparation for what we
have suffered by the warr, nor put us into any better condition
then what we were in before the war, for that will be shameful
for us. Thence parted with him and home through the dark over
the ruins by coach, with my sword drawn, to my office, where
despatched some business; and so home to my chamber and to
supper and to bed. This morning came up to my wife’s bedside, I
being up dressing myself, little Will Mercer to be her Valentine;
and brought her name writ upon blue paper in gold letters, done
by himself, very pretty — and we were both well pleased with it.
But I am also this year my wife’s Valentine, and it will cost me s/
— but that I must have laid out if we had not been Valentines. So
to bed.
724.
16 February 1667
16. To my Lord Bruncker’s, and there was Sir Rob. Murray,
whom I never understood so well as now by this opportunity of
discourse; he is a most excellent man of reason and learning, and
understands the doctrine of Musique and everything else I could
discourse of very finely. Here came Mr. Hooke, Sir George Ent,
Dr. Wren, and many others; and by and by the music, that is to say,
Seignor Vincentio, who is the maister Composer, and six more,
whereof two Eunuches (so tall, that Sir T. Harvy said well that he
believes they did grow large by being gelt, as our Oxen do) and one
woman, very well dressed and handsome enough but would not be
kissed, as Mr. Killigrew, who brought the company in, did
acquaint us. They sent two Harpsicons before; and by and by, after
tuning them, they begun; and I confess, very good music they
made; that is, the composition exceeding good, but yet not at all
more pleasing to me then what I have heard in English by Mrs.
Knipp, Capt. Cooke and others. Nor do I dote on the Eunuchs;
they sing endeed pretty high and have a mellow kind of sound, but
yet I have been as well satisfied with several women’s voices, and
men also, as Crispe of the Wardrobe. The woman sung well, but
that which distinguishes all is this: that in singing, the words are to
be considered and how they are fitted with notes, and then the
common accent of the country is to be known and understood by
the hearer, or he will never be a good judge of the vocall music of
another country. So that I was not taken with this at all, neither
understanding the first nor by practice reconciled to the latter, so
that their motions and risings and fallings, though it may be
pleasing to an Italian or one that understands that tongue, yet to me
it did not; but do from my heart believe that I could set words in
English, and make music of them, more agreeable to any
Englishman’s eare (the most judicious) then any Italian music set
for the voice and performed before the same man, unless he be
acquainted with the Italian accent of speech. The composition as to
the Musique part was exceeding good, and their justness in keeping
time by practice much before any that we have, unless it be a good
band of practised fiddlers.
So away; here being Capt. Cocke, with him stole away, leaving
them at it, in his coach; and to Mrs. Pierces, where I took up my
wife and there find that Mrs. Pierce’s little girl is my Valentine, she
having drawn me — which I was not sorry for, it easing me of
something more that I must have given to others. But here Ido first
observe the fashion of drawing of Motto’s as well as names; so that
725
Pierce, who drew my wife, did draw also a motto, and this girl
drew another for me. What mine was I have forgot; but my wife’s
was (Most virtuous and most fair); which, as it may be used, or an
Anagram made upon each name, might be very pretty. Thence
with Cocke and my wife; set him at home, and then we home. To
the office and there dida
little business, troubled that Ihave so much
been hindered by matters of pleasure from my business; but I shall
recover it I hope ina little time. So home and to supper, not at all
smitten with the music tonight, which I did expect should have
been so extraordinary, Tom Killigrew crying it up, and so all the
world, above all things in the world; and so to bed.