1667-06-03

Up; and by coach to St. James’s and with Sir W. Coventry a
great while, talking about several businesses — but especially about
accounts and how backward our Treasurer is in giving them
satisfaction; and the truth is, Ido doubt he cannot do better. But it is
strange to see, that being conscious of our doing little at this day nor
for some time past in our office, for want of money, I do hang my
head to him and cannot be so free with him as I used to be, nor can
be free with him, though of all men I think I have the least cause to
be so, having taken so much more pains (while I could do anything)
then the rest of my fellows. Parted with him; and so going through
the park, met Mr. Mills our parson, whom I went back with to
bring him to W. Coventry to give him the form of a Qualificacion
for the Duke of York to sign to, to enable him to have two livings;
which was a service I did, but much against my will, fora lazy, fat
priest. Thence to Westminster hall and there walked a turn or two
with Sir Wm. Doyly, who did lay a wager with me the Treasurer-
ship would be in one hand (notwithstanding this present Com-
mission) before Christmas; on which we did lay a pole of ling, a
brace of carps, and a pottle of wine, and Sir W. Penn and Mr.
Scowen to be at the eating of them. Thence down by water to
Deptford, it being Trinity Monday, when the Maister is chosen.
And there finding them all at church, and thinking they dined as
usual at Stepny, I turned back, having a good book in my hand (the
Life of Cardinal Wolsey, wrote by his own servant), and to
Ratcliffe; and so walked to Stepny and spent my time in the
churchyard looking over the gravestones, expecting when the
company would come; but finding no company stirring, I sent to
the house to see, and it seems they dine not there, but at Deptford;
so I back again to Deptford and there find them just sat down; and
so I down with them and we had a good dinner of plain meat, and a
good company at our Table; among others, my good Mr. Evelyn,
with whom after dinner I stepped aside and talked upon the present
posture of our affairs; which is, that the Dutch are known to be
abroad with 80 sail of ships of war and 20 fireships and the French
come into the Channell with 20 sail of men-of-war and5
fireships,
while we have not a ship at sea to do them any hurt with, but are
calling in all we can, while our Imbassadors are treating at Bredah
and the Duch look upon them as come to beg peace, and use them
accordingly. And all this through the negligence of our Prince; who
782
hath power, if he would, to maister all these with the money and
men that he hath had the command of, and may now have if he
would mind his business. But for [aught] we see, the Kingdom is
likely to be lost, as well as the reputation of it is, for ever —
notwithstanding so much reputation got and preserved by a Rebell
that went before him.
This discourse of ours ended with sorrowful reflections upon our
condition, and so broke up; and Creed andI got out of the room and
away by water to Whitehall, and there he and I waited in the
Treasury chamber. By and by, I upon desire was called in and
delivered in my report of my accounts: present, Lord Ashly,
Clifford, and Duncomb; who being busy, did not read it but
committed it to Sir G. Downing, and so I was dismissed. But Lord,
to see how Duncomb doth take upon him is an eysore, though I
think he deserves great honour; but only, the suddenness of his rise
and his pride. But I do like the wayof these Lords, that they admit
nobody to use many words; nor do they spend many words
themselfs, but in great state do hear what they see necessary, and
say little themselfs but bid withdraw. Thence Creed and I by water
up to Foxhall; and over against it stopped, thinking to see some
cock-fighting, but it was just being done; and therefore back again
to the other side and to Spring garden and there eat and drank a
little; and then to walk up and down the garden, reflecting upon the
bad management of things now compared with what it was in the
late rebellious times, when men, some for fear and some for
religion, minded their business; which none now do, by being void
~ of both. Much talk of this and other kinds, very pleasant; and so
when it was almost night, we home, setting him in at Whitehall, Ito
[the] Old Swan; and thence home, where to supper and then to read
a little; and so to bed.