1667-04-04

Up; and going down, found Jervas the barber with a periwig
which I had the other day cheapened at Westminster; but it being
full of nits, as heretofore his work used to be, I did now refuse it,
having bought elsewhere. So to the office till noon, busy; and then
(which I think I have not done three times in my life) left the board
upon occasion ofa letter from Sir W. Coventry; and meeting Balty
at my house, I took him with me by water, and to the Duke of
Albemarle to give him an account of that business; which was the
shipping off of some soldiers for the manning of the few ships now
going out, with Harman to the West Indies; which is a sad
consideration, that at the very beginning of the year, and few ships
abroad, we should be in such want of men; but they do hide
themselfs and swear they will not go to be killed and have no pay. I
find the Duke of Albemarle at dinner with sorry company, some of
his officers of the Army — dirty dishes and a nasty wife at table—and
bad meat; of which I made but an ill dinner. Pretty, to hear how she
talked against Capt. Du Tel, the Frenchman that the Prince and her
husband put out last year; and how, says she, the Duke of York hath
made for his good services his cup-bearer; yet fired more shot into
the Prince’s ship, and others of the King’s ships, then of the enemy.'
And the Duke of Albemarle did confirm it, and that somebody
in the fight did cry out that a little Dutchman by his ship did plague
him more then any other; upon which they were going to order him
to be sunk, when they looked and found it was Du Tell, who, as the
Duke of Albemarle says, had killed several men in several of our
ships. He said, but for his interest which he knew hehad at Court,
he had hanged him at the yard’s arm without staying for a Court
Martiall. My Lady Duchesse, among other things, discoursed of
the wisdom of dividing the fleet; which the Generall said nothing
to, though he knows well that it come from themselfs in the fleet
and was brought up hither by Sir Edw. Spragge. One at the table
told an odd passage in this late plague: that at Petersfield (Ithink he
said) one side of the street had every house almost infected through
the town; and the other, net one shut up. Dinner being done, I
brought Balty to the Duke of Albemarle to kiss his hands and thank
him for his kindness the last year to him and take leave of him. And
1. In the Four Days Battle.
759
4 April 1667
then Balty and I to walk in the park; and out of pity to his father,
told him what I had in my thoughts to do for him about the money
— that is, to make him Deputy-Treasurer of the fleet, which I have
done by getting Sir G. Carteret’s consent and an order from the
Duke of York for 1500l to be paid to him. He promises the whole
profit to be paid to my wife, for to be disposed on as she sees fit for
her father and mother’s relief. So, mightily pleased with our walk,
it being mighty pleasant weather, I back to Sir G. Carteret’s and
there he had newly dined; and talked and find that he doth give
everything over for lost, declaring no money to be raised. I made
him merry with telling him how many land-Admiralls we are to
have this year — Allen at Plymouth, Holmes at Portsmouth, Spragg
for Medway, Teddyman at Dover, Smith to the North, and
Harman to the South. Mightily pleased Iam with his family; and
my Lady Carteret was on the bed today, having been let blood, and
tells me of my Lady Jem’s being big-bellied.
Thence with him to Lord Treasurer’s, and there walked during
Council-sitting with Sir St. Fox, talking of the sad condition of the
King’s purse, and affairs thereby — and how sad the King’s life must
be, to pass by his officers every hour that are four years behindhand
unpaid. Here I spoke with Sir W. Coventry, who tells me plainly
that to all future complaints of lack of money he will answer but
with a shrugg of his shoulder; which methought did come to my
heart, to see him to begin to abandon the King’s affairs and let them
sink or swim, so he do his own part; which I confess I believe he
doth, beyond any officer the King hath; but unless he do endeavour
to make others do theirs, nothing will be done. The consideration
hereof did make me go away very sad; and so home by coach and
there took up my wife and Mercer (who had been today at
Whitehall to the Maundy, it being Maundy Thursday; but the King
did not wash the poor people’s feet himself, but the Bishop of
London did it for him; but I did not see it) and with them took up
Mrs. Anne Jones at her mother’s door; and so to take the ayre to
Hackny, where good neat’s tongue and things to eat and drink, and
very merry, the weather being mighty pleasant; and here I was told
that at their church they have a fair pair of Organs, which plays
while the people sing; which I am mighty glad of, wishing the like
at our church at London, and would give sol towards it. So, very
pleasant and hugging of Mercer in our going home, we home; and
there I to the office to doa
little business, and so to supper at home
and to bed.
751