1667-01-07

Lay long in bed. Then up and to the office, where busy all the
71s
morning. At noon (my wife being gone to Westminster) I with my
Lord Brouncker by coach as far as the Temple — in the way, he
telling me that my Lady Denham is at last dead. Some suspect her
poisoned, but it will be best known when her body is opened;
which will be today, she dying yesterday morning. The Duke of
York is troubled for her; but hath declared he will never have
another public mistress again — whichI shall be glad of, and would
the King would do the like. He tells me how the Parliament is
grown so jealous of the King’s being unfayre to them in the business
of the Bill for examining accounts — Irish Bill, and the business of
the papists, that they will not pass that business for money till they
see themselfs secure that those Bills will pass, which they observe
the Court to keep off till all the Bills come together, that the King
may accept what he pleases and what he pleases to reject — which
will undo all our business, and the kingdom too. He tells me how
Mr. Henery Howard of Norfolke hath given our Royall Society all
his grandfather’s Library; which is a noble gift they value at 1oool.
And gives them accommodation to meet in at his house — Arundell
house, they being now disturbed at Gresham College. Thence,
lighting at the Temple, to the ordinary hard by and eat a bit of meat;
and then by coach to fetch my wife from her b[rJother’s, and thence
to the Duke’s house and saw Macbeth; which thoughI saw it lately,
yet appears a most excellent play in all respects, but especially in
divertisement, though it be a deep tragedy; which is a strange
perfection in a tragedy, it being most proper here and suitable. So
home to write over fair my vows for this year, and then to supper
and to bed —in great peace of mind, having now doneit and brought
myself into order again and a resolution of keeping it — and having
entered my Journall to this night. So to bed, my eyes failing me
with writing.