1667-01-10

Up, and at the office all the morning. At noon home; and
there being business to do in the afternoon, took my Lord
Brouncker home with me, who dined with me — his discourse and
mine about the bad performances of the Controller’s and Sur-
veyor’s places by the hands they are now in, and the shame to the
service, and loss the King suffers by it. Then after dinner to the
office, where we and some of the chief of Trinity house met to
examine the occasionofthe loss of the Prince Royall, the maister and
Mates being examined — which I took and keep. And so broke up,
and I to my letters by the post; and so home and to supper with my
Wa
2
mind at pretty good ease, being entered upon minding my business;
and so to bed.
tr. Up, being troubled at my being found abed a-days by all sorts
of people —I having gota
trick ofsitting up later then I need, never
supping, or very seldom, before 12 at night. Then to the office;
there busy all the morning; and among other things, comes Sir W.
Warren and talked with mea good while; whose discourse Ilove, he
being a very wise man and full of good counsel, and his own
practices for wisdom much to be observed. And among other
things, he tells me how he is fallen in with my Lord Brouncker,
who hath promised him most perticular inward friendship, and yet
not to appear at the board to do so. And he told me how my Lord
Brouncker should take notice of the two flagons he saw at my house
at dinner at my late feast, and merrily (yet I know enviously) said I
could not come honestly by them. This I am glad to hear, though
vexed to see his ignoble soul. But I shall beware of him; and yet it is
fit he should see I am no mean fellow but can live in the world and
have something. At noon home to dinner; and then to the office
with my people and very busy, and did despatch to my great
satisfaction abundance of business, and do resolve by the grace of
God to stick to it till Ihave cleared my hand of most things wherein
I am in arrear in public and private matters. At night home to
supper and to bed. This day, ill news of my father’s being very ill of
his old grief, the Rupture, which troubles me.