1667-10-09

Up, and got ready and eat our breakfast and then took coach;
and the poor, as they did yesterday, did stand at the coach to have
something given them, as they do to all great persons, and I did give
them something; and the town musique did also come and play; but
Lord, what sad music they made — however, I was pleased with
them, being all of us in very good humour; and so set forth and
through the town, and observed at our College of Magdalen the
posts new-painted, and understand that the Vice-Chancellor is
there this year. And so away for Huntington, mightily pleased all
along the road to remember old stories; and came to Brampton at
about noon and there find my father and sister and brother all well;
and here laid up our things, and up and down to see the garden with
my father, and the house, and do altogether find it very pretty —
especially the little parlour and the summer-houses in the garden.
Only, the wall doth want greens upon it and the house is too low-
roofed; but that is only because of my coming from a house with
higher ceilings; but altogether is very pretty and I bless God that I
am like to have sucha pretty place to retire to. And I did walk with
my father without doors and do find a very convenient way of
laying out money there in building, which will make a very good
seat; and the place deserves it, I think, very well. Mr. Sheply stayed
with us and supped, and full of good country discourse; and when
supper done, took his leave and we all to bed — my wife and I in the
high bed in our chamber, and Willet in the trundle-bed, which she
desired to lie in, by us.
10-11. Waked in the morning with great pain I, of the Collique,
by cold taken yesterday, I believe with going up and down in my
shirt; but with rubbing my belly, keeping of it warm, I did at last
come to some ease, and rose; and up to walk up and down the
garden with my father, to talk of all our concernments — about a
husband for my sister, whereof there is at present no appearance.
But we must endeavour to find her one now, for she grows old and
ugly. Then for my brother; and resolve he shall stay here this
winter, and then I will either send him to Cambridge fora
year, till I
get him some church promotion, or send him to sea as a chaplain —
where he may study and earn his living. By this time it was almost
837
1667 10 October
noon, and then my father and I and wife and Willett abroad by
coach round the Towne of Brampton to observe any other place as
good as ours, and find none; and so back with great pleasure and
thence went all of us, my sister and brother and W. Hewer, to
dinner to Hinchingbrooke, where we had a good plain country
dinner, but most kindly used; and here dined the Minister of
Brampton and his wife, who is reported a very good, but poor
man. Here I spent alone with my Lady, after dinner, the most of the
afternoon; and anon the two Twins! were sent for from Schoole at
Mr. Taylors to come to see me; and Itook them into the garden and
there in one of the Summer-houses did examine them; and do find
them so well advanced in their learning, that Iwas amazed atit, they
repeating'a whole Ode without book out of Horace, and did give
me a very good account of anything almost, and did make me very
readily very good Latin and did give me good account of their
Greek grammer, beyond all possible expectation; and so grave and
manly as I never saw, I confess, nor could have believed — so that
they will be fit to go on to Cambridge in two years at most. They
are but little, but very like one another; and well-looked children.
Then in to my Lady again, and stayed till it was almost night again;
and then took leave for a great while again, but with extraordinary
kindness from my Lady, who looks upon me like one of her own
family and interest.
So thence, my wife and people [by] the highway, and I walked
over the park with Mr. Sheply and through the grove, which is
mighty pretty as is imaginable; and so over their drawbridge to
Nun’s Bridge and so to my father’s, and there sat and drank and
talked a little and then parted; and he being gone, and what
company there was, my father and I with a dark lantern, it being
now night, into the guarden with my wife and there went about our
great work to dig up my gold. But Lord, what a tosse I was for
some time in, that they could not justly tell where it was, that I
begun heartily to sweat and be angry that they should not agree
better upon the place, and at last to fear that it was gone; but by and
by, poking with a spit, we found it, and then begun with a spudd to
lift up the ground; but good God, to see how sillily they did it, not
half a foot under ground and in the sight of the world from a
hundred places if anybody by accident were near-hand, and within
sight of a neighbour’s window and their hearing also, being close
1. Oliver and John, Sandwich’s twelve-year old sons.
838
by; only, my father says that he saw them all gone to church before
he begun the work when he laid the money, but that doth not
excuse it to me; but I was out of my wits almost, and the more from
that upon my lifting up the earth with the spud, I did discern that I
scattered the pieces of gold round about the ground among the
grass and loose earth; and taking up the Iron head-pieces wherein
they were put, Iperceive the earth was got among the gold and wet,
so that the bags wereall rotten, all the notes, that I could not tell
what in the world to say to it, not knowing how to judge what was
wanting or what had been lost by Gibson in his coming down;
which, all put together, did make me mad; and at last was forced to
take up the head-pieces, dirt and all, and as many of the scattered
pieces as I could with the dirt discern by the candlelight, and carry
them up into my brother’s chamber and there lock them up till [had
eat a little supper; and then all people going to bed, W. Hewer and I
did all alone, with several pales of water and basins, at last wash the
dirt off of the pieces and parted the pieces and the dirt, and then
begun to tell; and by a note which I had of the value of the whole (in
my pocket) do find that there was short above 100 pieces, which did
make me mad; and considering that the neighbour’s house was so
near, that we could not suppose we could speak one to another in
the garden at the place where the gold lay (especially by my father
being deaf) but they must know what we had been doing on, I
feared that they might in the night come and gather some pieces and
prevent us the next morning; so W. Hewer and I out again about
midnight (for it was now grown so late) and there by candlelight
did make shift to gather 45 pieces more — and so in and to cleanse
them, and by this time it was past 2 in the morning; and so to bed,
with my mind pretty quiet to think that Ihave recovered so many.
And then to bed, andIlay in the trundle-bed, the girl being gone
to bed to my wife. And there lay in some disquiet all night, telling
of the clock till it was daylight; and then rose and called W. Hewer,
and he and I, with pails and a Sive, did lock ourselfs into the garden
and there gather all the earth about the place into pails, and then Sive
those pails in one of the summer-houses (just as they do for
Dyamonds in other parts of the world); and there to our great
content did with much trouble by 9 a-clock, and by that time we
emptied several pails and could not find one, we did make the last
night’s 45 up 79; so that we are come to about 20 or 30 of what I
think the true number should be, and perhaps within less; and of
them I may reasonably think that Mr. Gibson might lose some, so
839
that I am pretty well satisfied that my loss is not great and do bless
God that it is so well; and do leave my father to make a second
examination of the dirt — which he promises he will do; and poor
man, is mightily troubled for this accident. But I declared myself
very well satisfied, and so endeed I am and my mind at rest in it, it
being but an accident which is unusual; and so gives me some kind
of content to remember how painful it is sometimes to keep money,
as well as to get it, and how doubtful I was how to keep it all night
and how to secure it to London. And so got all my gold put up in
bags; and so having the last night wrote to my Lady Sandwich to
lend me John Bowles to go along with me my Journy, not telling
her the reason, but it was only to secure my gold, we to breakfast;
and then about ro a-clock took coach, my wife and I, and Willett
and W. Hewer, and Murford and Bowles (whom my Lady lent
me), and my brother John on horseback; and with these four I
thought myself pretty safe. But before we went out, the Hunt-
ington music came to me and played, and it was better then that of
Cambridge. Here I took leave of my father, and did give my sister
20s. She cried at my going; but whether it was at her unwillingness
for my going or any unkindness of my wife’s or no, Iknow not; but
God forgive me, I take her to be so cunning and ill-natured that I
have no great love for her; but only, is my sister and must be
provided for. My gold, I put into a basket and set under one of the
seats; and so my work every quarter of an hour was to look to see
whether all was well, and did ride in great fear all the day; but it was
a pleasant day and good company, and I mightily contented. Mr.
Sheply saw me beyond St. Neotts and there parted, and we straight
to Stevenage, through Baldock lanes, which are already very bad.
And at Stevenage we came well before night, and all safe; and there
with great care I got the gold up to the chamber, my wife carrying
one bag and the girl another and W. Hewer the rest in the basket,
and set it all under a bed in our chamber; and then sat down to talk
and were very pleasant, satisfying myself, among other things from
Jo. Bowles, in some terms of Hunting and about deere, bucks, and
does; and so anon to supper, and very merry we were and a good
supper; and after supper to bed. Brecocke alive still, and the best
Host I know almost.