1667-10-08

Up pretty betimes, though not so soon as we entended, by
reason of Murford’s not rising and then not knowing how to open
835
1667 8 October
our door; which, and some other pleasant simplicities of the fellow,
did give occasion to us to call him Sir Martin Marr-all;:! and W.
Hewers being his helper and counsellor, we did call him all this
journey, Mr. Warner, which did give us good occasion of mirth
now and then. At last rose, and up and broke our fast, and then took
coach and away; and at Newport did call on Mr. Louther, and he
and his friend and the maister of the house, their friend where they
were (a gentleman), did presently get a-horseback and overtook us,
and went with us to Audly end and did go along with us all over the
house and garden; and mighty merry we were. The house endeed
doth appear very fine, but not so fine as it hath heretofore to me.
Perticularly, the ceilings are not so good as I alway took them to be,
being nothing so well wrought as my Lord Chancellors are; and
though the figure of the house without be very extraordinary good,
yet the stayrecase is exceeding poor; and a great many pictures, and
not one good one in the house but one of Harry the 8th done by
Holben; and not one good suit of hangings in all the house, but all
most ancient things, such as I would not give the hanging-up of in
my house; and the other furniture, beds and other things,
accordingly. Only, the gallery is good; and above all things, the
cellars, where we went down and drank of much good liquor, and
endeed the cellars are fine; and here my wife and I did sing to my
great content, and then to the garden and there eat many grapes,
and took some with us; and so away thence, exceeding well
satisfied, though not to that degree that by my old esteem of the
house I ought and did expect to have done — the situation of it not
pleasing me. Here we parted with Louther and his friends, and
away to Cambrige, it being foul, rainy weather; and there did take
up at the Rose, for the sake of Mrs. Dorothy Drawwater, the
vintener’s daughter, which is mentioned in the play of Sir Martin
Marr-all. Here we had a good chamber and bespoke a good supper;
and then I took my wife and W. Hewer and Willett (it holding up a
little) and showed them Trinity College and St. Johns Library, and
went to King’s College chapel to see the outside of it only, and so to
our Inne; and with much pleasure did this, they walking in their
pretty morning gowns, very handsome, and I proud to find myself
in condition to do this; and so home to our lodging, and there by
and by to supper with much good sport, talking with the drawers
concerning matters of the town and persons whom I remember;
1. From the character in Dryden’s play of that name.
836
and so after supper to cards and then to bed, lying, I in one bed and
my wife and girl in another in the same room; and very merry we
talking together and mightily pleased both of us with the girl.