1667-08-30

Up and to the office, where we sat busy all the morning. At
noon home to dinner, where Daniel and his wife with us, come to
see whether I could get him any imployment. But Iam so far from
it, that I have trouble upon my mind how to dispose of Mr. Gibson
and one or two more I am concerned for in the victualling business,
which are to be now discharged. After dinner by coach to
Whitehall. Having done my business, I to Creeds chamber and
thence out to Whitehall with him, in our way meeting with Mr.
Cooling, my Lord Chamberlaines secretary, on horseback, who
stopped to speak to us; and he proved very drunk and did talk and
would have talked all night with us, I not being able to break loose
from him, he holding me so by the hand. But Lord, to see his
present humour; how he swears at every word and talks of the King
and my Lady Castleman in the plainest words in the world. And
from him I gather that the story I learned yesterday is true — that the
King hath declared that he did not get the child of which she is
conceived at this time, he having not as he says lain with her this half
year; but she told him — “God damn me, but you shall own it!”’ It
seems he isjealous ofJermin and she loves him, so that the thoughts
of his marrying of my Lady Falmouth puts her into fits of the
mother. And he, it seems, hath lain with her from time to time
continually, for a good while; and once, as this Cooling says, the
815
1667 30 July—9g August
King had like to have taken him a-bed with her, but that he was fain
to creep under the bed into her closet. And so he talked very lewdly.
And then took notice of my kindness to him on shipboard seven
years ago, when the King was coming over, and how much he was
obliged to me; but says, “Pray look upon this acknowledgement of
a kindness in me to bea miracle; for,” says [he], “‘it is against the law
at Court for a man that borrows money of me, even to buy his place
with, to own it the next Sunday.” And then told us his horse was a
Bribe, and his boots a bribe; and told us he was made upofbribes, as
a Oxford scholar is set out with other men’s goods when he goes
out of town, and that he makes every sort of tradesmen to bribe
him; and invited me home to his house to taste of his bribe-wine. I
never heard so much vanity from a man in my life. So being now
weary of him, we parted, and I took coach and carried Creed to the
Temple, there set him down, and to my office, where busy late till
my eyes begun to ake; and then home to supper: a pullet, with good
sauce, to my liking; and then to play on the flagelette with my wife,
which she now does very prettily, and so to bed.
-* AUGUST#-
4. Lords day. Busy at my office from morning till night in writing
with my own hand fair our large general account of the expense and
debt of the Navy — which lasted me till night to do, that Iwas almost
blind; and Mr. Gibson with me all day long, and dined with me; and
excellent discourse I had with him, he understanding all the
business of the Navy most admirably. To walk alittle with my wife
at night in the garden, it being very hot weather again, and so to
supper and to bed.
g. Up, and betimes with Sir H. Cholmly upon some accounts of
Tanger; and then he and I to Westminster to Mr. Burges and then
walked in the Hall. And he andItalked, and he doth really declare
that he expects that of necessity this Kingdom will fall back again to
a commonwealth; and other wise men are of the same mind, this
family doing all that silly men can do to make themselfs unable to
support their Kingdom — minding their lust and their pleasure, and
making their. government so chargeable, that people do well
remember better things were done, and better managed and with
816
g—11 August 1667
much less charge, under a commonwealth then they have been by
this King.
to. At the office all the morning, and at noon home to dinner,
where I sang and piped with my wife with great pleasure, and did
hire a coach to carry us to Barnet tomorrow. After dinner, I to the
office and there wrote as long as my eyes would give me leave, and
then abroad and to the New Exchange to the bookseller’s there,
where I hear of several new books coming out — Mr. Pratts history
of the Royal Society and Mrs. Phillips’s poems. Sir Jo. Denhams
poems are going to be all printed together; and among others, some
new things, and among them he showed me a copy of verses of his
upon Sir Jo. Minnes’s going heretofore to Bulloigne to eat a pig.
Cowly, he tells me, is dead, who it seems was a mighty civil,
serious man, which I did not know before. Several good plays are
also likely to be abroad soon —as, Mustapha and Henry the 5th. Here
having stayed and divertized myself'a good while, Ihome again and
to finish my letters by the post; and so home, and betimes to bed
with my wife because of rising betimes tomorrow.
11. Lords day. Up by 4a-clock and ready with Mrs. Turner to take
coach before 5; which we did, and set on our Journy and got to the
Wells at Barnett by 7 a-clock, and there found many people a-
drinking; but the morning is a very cold morning, so as we were
very cold all the way in the coach. Here we met Joseph Batelier and I
talked with him, and here was W. Hewers also and his uncle
Steventon. So after drink[ing] three glasses, and the women
nothing, we back by coach to Barnett, where to the Red Lyon;
where we light and went up into the Great Room and there drank
and eat some of the best cheese-cakes that ever Ieat in my life; and so
took coach again, and W. Hewers on horseback with us, and so to
Hatfield to the inn next my Lord Salsbury’s house, and there we
rested ourselfs and drank and bespoke dinner; and so to church, it
being just church-time, and there we find my Lord and my Lady
Sands and several fine ladies of the family and a great many
handsome faces and gentile persons more in the church, and did
hear a most excellent good sermon, which pleased me mightily; and
very devout, it being upon the signs of saving grace where it is in a
man; and one sign, which held him all this day, was that where that
grace was, there is also the grace of prayer; which he did handle very
finely. In this church lies the former Lord Salsbury, Cecill, buried in
817
a noble tomb. So the church being done, we to our inn and there
dined very well and mighty merry; and as soon as had dined, we
walked out into the park, through the fine walk of trees and to the
vineyard, and there showed them that; which is in good order, and
endeed a place of great delight; which together with our fine walk
through the park, was of as much pleasure as could be desired in the
world for country pleasure, and good ayre. Being come back, and
weary with the walk, for as I made it it was pretty long, being come
back to our Inne, there the women had pleasure in putting on some
straw hats, which are much worn in this country; and did become
them mightily, but especially my wife. So after resting a while, we
took coach again and back to Barnett, where W. Hewers took us
into his lodging, which is very handsome, and there did treat us
very highly with cheesecakes, cream, tarts, and other good things;
and then walked into the garden, which was pretty, and there filled
my pockets full of Filberts, and so with much pleasure (among
other things, I met in this house with a printed book of the life of O.
Cromwell, to his honour as a soldier and politician, though as a
rebeil, the first of that kind that ever I saw, and it is well done) took
coach again; and got home with great content, just at day shutting
in; and so as soon as home, eata little, and then to bed with
exceeding great content at our day’s work.