1667-06-19

Up and to the office, where all the morning busy with Fist
again, beginning early to overtake my business in my letters, which
for a post or two have by the late and present troubles been
interrupted. At noon comes Sir W. Batten and W. Penn, and we to
W. Penn’s house and there discoursed of business an hour; and by
and by comes an order from Sir R. Browne, commanding me this
afternoon to attend the Council board with all my books and papers
touching the Medway. I was ready [to fear] some mischief to
myself, though that that appears most reasonable is that it is to
inform them about Comissioner Pett. I eat a little bit in haste at W.
Batten’s without much comfort, being fearful, though I show it
not; and to my office and did get up some papers and find out the
most material letters and orders in our books. And so took coach
and to the Council chamber lobby, where I met Mr. Eveling, who
doth miserably decry our follies that brings all this misery upon us.
While we were discoursing over our public misfortunes, Iam called
in to a large committee of the Council: present, the Duke of
Albemarle, Anglesy, Arlington, Ashly, Carteret, Duncomb,
Coventry, Ingram, Clifford, Lauderdale, Morice, Manchester,
Craven, Carlisle, Bridgewater; and after Sir W. Coventry’s telling
them what orders his Royal Highness had made for the safety of the
Medway, I told them to great full content what we had done, and
showed them our letters. Then was P. Pett call[ed] in with the
Lieutenant of the Tower. He is in his old clothes, and looked most
sillily. His charge was chiefly the not carrying up of the great ships,
and the using of the boats in carrying away his goods; in which he
answered very sillily — though his faults to me seem only great
omissions. Lord Arlington and Coventry very severe against him;
the former saying that if he was not guilty, the world would think
them all guilty. The latter urged that there must be some fault, and
that the Admiral must be found to have done his part. He said he
used never a boat till they were all gone but one — and that was to
carry away things of great value, and those were his models of
ships; which when the Council, some of them, had said they wished
that the Dutch had had them instead of the King’s ships, he
answered he did believe the Dutch would have made more
advantage of the models then of the ships, and the King have had
795
greater loss thereby. This they all laughed at. After having heard
him for an hour or more, they bid him withdraw, I all this while
showing him no respect, but rather against him; for which God
forgive me, for I mean no hurt to him, but only find that these
Lords are upon their own purgation, and it is necessary I should be
so in behalf of the office. He being gone, they caused Sir Rd.
Browne to read over his minutes; and then my Lord Arlington
moved that they might be put into my hands to put into form, I
being more acquainted with such business; and they were so.
So I away back with my books and papers; and when I got into
the Court, it was pretty to see how people gazed upon me — that I
thought myself obliged to salute people and to smile, lest they
should think I was a prisoner too; but afterward I found the most
did take me to be there to bear evidence against P. Pett. But my fear
was such, at my going in, of the success of the day, that at my going
in I did think fit to give T. Hater (whom I took with me to wait the
event) my closet-key and directions where to find soo/ and more in
silver and gold, and my tallies, to remove in case of any misfortune
to me. I got home; and I and my wife to talk; who did give me so
bad an account of her and my father’s method in burying of our
gold, that made me mad -—and she herself is not pleased with it, she
believing that my sister knows of it. My father and she did it on
Sunday when they were gone to church, in open daylight in the
midst of the garden, where for aught they knew, many eyes might
see them; which put me into such trouble, that I was almost mad
about it, and presently cast about how to have it back again to
secure it here, the times being a little better now; at least, at
Whitehall they seem as if they were — but one way or other, I am
resolved to free them from the place ifI can get them. Such was my
trouble at this, that Ifell out with my wife; that though new come to
town, Idid not sup with her nor speak to her tonight, but to bed and
sleep.