1667-09-11

Mr. Moore discoursed with me of public matters; the sum of
827
1667 | 11-15 September
which is that he doth doubt that there is more at the bottom then the
removal of the Chancellor; that is, he doth verily believe that the
King doth resolve to declare the Duke of Monmouth legitimate —
and that we shall soon see it. This I do not think the Duke of York
will endure without blows; but his poverty, and being lessened by
having the Chancellor fallen and W. Coventry gone from him, will
disable him from being able to do anything almost, he being
himself almost lost in the esteem of people; and will be more and
more, unless my Lord Chancellor (who is already begun to be
pitied by some people, and to be better thought of then was
expected) doth recover himself in Parliament. He would seem to
fear that this difference about the Crowne (ifthere be nothing else)
will undo us.
13. To the office and there despatched business till 10 a-clock, and
then with Sir W. Batten and my wife and Mrs. Turner to
Walthamstow by hackney coach to Mrs. Shipman’s to dinner,
where Sir W. Penn and my Lady and Mrs. Lowther (the latter of
which hath got a sore nose, given her I believe from her husband,
which made me I could not look upon her with any pleasure); and
here a very good and plentiful wholesome dinner and above all
thing, such plenty of milke-meats (she keepinga great dairy) and so
good as Inever met with. Afternoon proved very foul weather, the
morning fair. We stayed talking till evening, and then home and
there to my flagelette with my wife; and so to bed without any
supper, my belly being full and dinner not digested. It vexed me to
hear how Sir W. Penn, who came alone from London, being to
send his coachman for his wife and daughter and bidding his
coachman in much anger to go for them (he being vexed, like a
rogue, to do anything to please his wife), his coachman Tom was
heard to say, “A pox of God rot her! Can she [not] walk hither?”
These words do so mad me, that I could find in my heart to give
him or my Lady notice of them.
15. Lords day. Up to my chamber, there to set some papers to
rights. By and by to church, where I stood in continual fear of Mrs.
Markham’s coming to church and offering to come into our pew; to
prevent which, as soon as ever Iheard the great door open, Idid step
back and clapped my breech to our pew door, that she might be
forced to shove me to come in; but as God would have it, she did
not come. Mr. Mills preached; and after sermon, by invitation he
828
and his wife came to dine with me (which is the first time they have
been in my house I think these five years), I thinking it not amiss,
because of their acquaintance in our country, to show them some
respect. Mr. Turner and his wife and their son the Captain dined
with me, and IJhad a very good dinner for them — and very merry;
and after dinner he was forced to go, though it rained, to Stepny to
preach. We also to church, and then home, and there comes Mr.
Pelling with two men by promise, one Wallington and Piggott; the
former whereof, being a very little fellow, did sing a most excellent
bass, and yet a poor fellow, a working goldsmith, that goes without
gloves to his hands. Here we sung several good things, but I am
more and more confirmed that singing with many voices is not
singing, but a sort of Instrumentall music, the sense of the words
being lost by not being heard, and especially as they set them with
Fuges of words, one after another; whereas singing properly, |
think, should be but with one or two voices at most, and that
counterpoint. They supped with me; and so broke up, and then my
wife and I to my chamber, where through the badness of my eyes
she was forced to read to me, which she doth very well; and was
Mr. Boyle’s discourse upon the Style of the Scripture, which is a
very fine piece. And so to bed.