1667-04-31

Lords day. Up; and my tailor’s boy brings my mourning
clothes home, and my wife’s, hers and Barker’s; but they go not to
church this morning. I to church, and with my mourning, very
handsome, and new periwig make a great show. After church,
home to dinner, and there came Betty Michell and her husband; Ido
and shall love her; but, poor wretch, she is now almost ready to lie
down. After dinner, Balty (who dined also with us) and Iwith Sir
J.
747
1667 31 March—3 April
Mennes in his coach to Whitehall, but did nothing; but by water to
Strand bridge and thence walked to my Lord Treasurer’s, where the
King, Duke of York, and the Caball, and much company without;
anda
fine day. Anon comes out from the Caball my Lord Hollis and
Mr. H. Coventry, who it is conceived have received their
instructions from the King this day; they being to begin their
journey towards their treaty at Bredagh speedily, their passes being
come. Here I saw Lady Northumberland and her daughter-in-law
(my Lord Treasurer’s daughter), my Lady Piercy, a beautiful lady
endeed. So away back by water; and left Balty at Whitehall, and Ito
Mrs. Martin and there haze todo which yo would hazer con her; and
so by coach home and there to my chamber; and then to supper and
bed — having not had time to make up my accounts of this month at
this very day, but will in a day or two and pay my forfeit for not
doing it, though business hath most hindered me. The month shuts
up, only with great desires of peace in all of us, and a belief that we
shall have a peace in most people, ifa peace can be had on any terms,
for there is a necessity of it; for we cannot go on with the war, and
our maisters are afeared to come to depend upon the good will of
the Parliament any more as I do hear.
~+APRILLY-
2. Upand to the office, where all the morning sitting; and much
trouble, but little business done for want of money, which makes
me mighty melancholy. At noon home to dinner, and Mr. Deane
with me; who hath promised me a very fine draught of the Rupert,
which he will make purposely for me with great perfection; which
he will make one of the beautifullest things that ever was seen of
that kind in the world -—she being a ship that will deserve it. Then to
the office, where all the afternoon very busy; and in the evening,
weary home; and there to sing, but vexed with the unreadiness of
the girl’s voice to learn the latter part of my song,’ though I confess
it is very hard half-notes. So to supper and to bed.
3. Up and with Sir W. Batten to Whitehall to Sir W. Coventry’s
chamber, and there did receive the Duke’s order for Balty’s
1. It is decreed.
748
3 April 1667
receiving of the contingent money to be paymaister of it; and it
pleases me the more for that it is but 1500/, which will be butalittle
sum for to try his ability and honesty in the disposing of— and so I
am the willinger to trust him and pass my word for him therein. By
and by up to the Duke of York, where our usual business; and
among other things, I read two most dismal lettersof the straits we
are in (from Coll. Middleton and Comissioner Taylor) that ever
were writ in the world, so as the Duke of York would have them to
show the King. And to every demand of money, whereof we
proposed many and very pressing ones, Sir G. Carteret could make
no answer but “No money’’, which I confess made me almost
ready to cry for sorrow and vexation; but that which was the most
considerable was when Sir G. Carteret did say that he had no fond
to raise money on; and being asked by Sir W. Coventry whether the
Eleven Months Tax was not a fond, and he answered no — that the
banquiers would not lend money upon it. Thence to the chapel, and
there by chance hear that Dr. Crew is to preach; and so into the
Organ loft, where I met Mr. Carteret and my Lady Jemimah and
Sir Tho. Crew’s two daughters, and Dr. Childe played — and Dr.
Crew did make a very pretty, neat, sober, honest sermon; and
delivered it very readily, decently, and gravely, beyond his years —
so as I was exceedingly taken with it, and I believe the whole chapel
— he being but young; but his manner of his delivery I do like
exceedingly. His text was, ““But first seeke the kingdom of God and
all these things shall be added unto you.”’ Thence with my Lady to
Sir G. Carteret’s lodgings, and so up into the house and there do
hear that the Dutch letters are come and say that the Dutch have
ordered a passe to be sent for our Commissioners; and that it is now
upon the way, coming with a Trumpeter, blinded as is usual. But I
perceive everybody begins to doubt the success of the treaty, all
their hopes being only that if it can be had on any terms, the
Chancellor will have it; for he dare not come before a Parliament,
nor a great many more of the Courtiers, and the King himself doth
declare he doth not desire it, nor entend it but on a strait — which
God defend him from. Here I hear how the King is not so well
pleased of this marriage between the Duke of Richmond and Mrs.
Stewart as is talked; and that he by a wilde did fetch her to the Beare
at the Bridge foot, where a coach was ready, and they are stole away
into Kent without the King’s leave; and that the King hath said he
will never see her more, but people do think that it is onlya trick.
This day I saw Prince Rupert abroad in the Vane Roome, pretty
749
well as he used to be, and looks as well; only, something appears to
be under his periwig on the crown of his head.