1667-10-27

Upand to the office, where very busy all the morning. While
was busy at the office, my wife sends for me to come to home, and
what was it but to see the pretty girl’ which she is taking to wait
upon her; and though she seems not altogether so great a beauty as
she had before told me, yet endeed she is mighty pretty; and so
pretty, that I find I shall be too much pleased with it, and therefore
could be contented as to my judgment, though not to my passion,
that she might not come, lest I may be found too much minding
her, to the discontent of my wife. She is to come next week. She
seems by her discourse to be grave beyond her bigness and age, and
exceeding well-bred as to her deportment, having been a scholar in
a school at Bow these seven or eight year. To the office again, my
[thoughts] running on this pretty girl; and there till noon, when
Creed and Sheres come and dined with me; and we had a great deal
of pretty discourse of the ceremoniousness of the Spaniards — whose
ceremonies are so many and so known, that he tells me, upon all
1. Deborah Willet.
830
27 September 1667
occasions of joy or sorrow in a grandee’s family, my Lord
Embassador 1s fain to send one with an en hora buena (ifit be upon a
marriage or birth of a child) or a pesa me, if it be upon the death of a
child or so. And these ceremonies are so set, and the words of the
compliment, that he hath been sent from my Lord when he hath
done no more then send in word to the grandee that one was there
from the Embassador; and he knowing what was his errand, that
hath been enough, and he hath never spoken with him. Nay,
several grandees, having been to marry a daughter, have wrote
letters to my Lord to give him notice and out of the greatness of his
wisdom to desire his advice, though people he never saw; and then
my Lord, he answers by commending the greatness of his
discretion in making so good an alliance &c., so ends. He says that it
is so far from dishonour to a man to give private revenge for an
affront, that the contrary is a disgrace; they holding that he that
receives an affront is not fit to appear in the sight of the world till he
hath revenged himself; and therefore, that a gentleman there that
receives an affront oftentimes never appears again in the world till
he hath by some private way or other revenged himself; and that on
this account, several have fallowed their enemy privately to the
Indys, thence to Italy, thence to France and back again, watching
for an opportunity to be revenged. He says my Lord was fain to
keep a letter from the Duke of York to the Queen of Spaina great
while in his hands before he could think fit to deliver it, till he had
learnt whether the Queen would receive it, it being directed to his
““Cosen.” He says that many ladies in Spain, after they are found to
be with child, do never stir out of their beds or chambers till they are
brought to bed —so ceremonious they are in that point also. He tells
of their wooing by serenades at the window, and that their friends
do alway make the match; but yet that they have opportunities to
meet at Masse at church, and there they make love. That the Court
there hath no dancings, nor visits at night to see the King or
Queene, but is always just like a Cloyster, nobody stirring in it.
That my Lord Sandwich wears a beard now, turned up in the
Spanish manner. But that which pleases me most endeed, is that the
peace which he hath made with Spain’ is now printed here, and is
acknowledged by all the merchants to be the best peace that ever
England had with them; and it appears that the King thinks it so, for
this is printed before the Ratification is gone over; whereas that
1. A commercial treaty which proved to be to the advantage of both nations.
831
1667 27 September—1 October
with France and Holland was not in a good while after, till Copys
came over of it in English out of Holland and France, that it was a
reproach not to have it printed here. This 1am mighty glad of; and is
the first and only piece of good news, or thing fit to be owned, that
this nation hath done several years.
After dinner, I to the office; and they gone and anon, comes
Pelling, and he and I to Greys Inne fields, thinking to have heard
Mrs. Knight sing at her lodgings by a friend’s means ofhis; but we
came too late, so must try another time. So lost our labour, and I by
coach home and there to my chamber and did a great deal of good
business about my Tanger accounts; and so with pleasure discours-
ing with my wife of our Journy shortly to Brampton, and of this
little girle, which endeed runs in my head and pleases me mightily,
though I dare not own it; and so to supper and to bed.
29. Lords day. Up, and putofffirst my summer’s silk suit and put
on a cloth one. Then to church and so home to dinner, my wife and
I alone to a good dinner. All the afternoon talking in my chamber
with my wife about my keeping a coach the next year, and doing
something to my house which will cost money —that is, furnish our
best chamber with tapestry — and other rooms with pictures. In the
evening read [a] good book, my wife to me; and I did even my
kitchen accounts. Then to supper, and so to bed.
-* OCTOBER%-
1. All the morning busy at the office. Pleased mightily with my
girl that we have got to wait on my wife. Atnoon dined with Sir G.
Carteret and the rest of our officers at his house in Broad street, they
being there upon his accounts. After dinner took coach and to my
wife, who was gone before into the Strand, there to buy a
nightgowne; where I found her in a shop with her pretty girl, and
having bought it, away home; and I thence to Sir G. Carteret’s
again, and so took coach alone, it now being almost night, to
Whitehall and there in the Boarded gallery did hear the music with
which the King is presented this night by Monsieur Grebus, the
master of his music — both instrumental (I think 24 violins) and
vocall, an English song upon peace; but God forgive me, I was
never so little pleased with a consort of music in my life — the
832
manner of setting of words and repeating them out of order, and
that with a number of voices, makes me sick, the whole design of
vocall music being lost by it. Here was agreat press of people, but I
did not see many pleased with it; only, the instrumental music he
had brought by practice to play very just. So thence late, in the dark
round by the Wall home by coach; and there to sing and sup with
my wife and look upon our pretty girl, and so to bed.