1667-10-20

Lords day. Up, and put on my new Tunique of velvett, which
is very plain, but good. This morning is brought to me an order for
the presenting the committee of Parliament tomorrow witha list of
the commanders and ships’ names of all the fleets set out since the
war, and perticularly of those ships which were divided from the
fleet with Prince Rupert;? which gives me occasion to see that they
are busy after that business — and I am glad of it. Sol alone to church
and then home, and there Mr. Deane comes and dines with me by
appointment; and both at and after dinner, he andI spent all the day
1. Lenses suitable for young people with short sight.
2. In the Four Days Battle, June 1666.
842
till it was dark in discourse of business of the Navy and the ground
of the many miscarriages; wherein he doth inform me in many
more then Iknew, and Ihad desired him to put them in writing; and
many endeed they are, and good ones. And also we discoursed of
the business of shipping, and he hath promised me a Draught of the
ship he is now building — wherein I am mightily pleased. This
afternoon comes to me Capt. O Bryan, abouta ship that the King
hath given him, and he andItalk of the Parliament and he tells me
that the business of the Duke of York’s slackening sail in the first
fight, at the beginning of the war,’ is brought into Question, and
Sir W. Pen and Captain Cox is to appear tomorrow about it. And is
thought will at last be laid upon Mr. Brouncker’s bringing orders
from the Duke of York (which the Duke of York doth not own) to
Capt. Cox to do it; but it seems they do resent this very highly, and
are mad in going through all businesses where they can lay any
fault. | am glad to hear that in the world I am as kindly spoke of as
anybody; for, for aught Isee, there is bloody work like to be, Sir W.
Coventry having been forced to produce a letter in Parliament
wherein the Duke of Albemarle did from Sherenesse write in what
good posture all things were at Chatham, and that the Chain was so
well placed that he feared no attempts of the enemy. So that, among
other things, I see everybody is upon his own defence, and spares
not to blame another to defend himself; and the same course I shall
take. But God knows where it will end.