1667-05-09

To St. James’s and there found Sir W. Coventry alone in his
chamber, and sat and talked with him more then I have done a great
while, of several things — of the Navy, how our debts and wants do
unfit us for doing anything. He tells me he hears stories of
Commissioner Pett of selling Timber to the Navy under other
names; which I told him I believe is true, and did give him an
instance. He told me also how his clerk Floyd he hath put away for
his common idlenesse and ill company; and perticularly, that
yesterday he was found not able to come to attend him, by being
run into the arme in a squable, though he pretends it was done in the
street by strangers, at 9 at night by the Maypole in the Strand. Sir
W. Coventry did write to me this morning to recommend him
another; which Icould find my heart to do W. Hewers for his good,
but do believe he will not part with me, nor have I any mind to let
him go. I would my brother were fit for it; I would adventure him
there. He insists upon an unmarried man — that can write well— and
hath French enough to transcribe it only from a copy, and may
write shorthand if it may be. Thence with him to my Lord
Chancellors at Clarendon house to a Committee for Tanger, where
several things spoke of and proceeded on; and perticularly sending
Commissioners’ thither before the new Governor goes, which I
think will signify as much good as everything else that hath been
done about the place; which is, none at all. Mightily pleased with
the nobleness of this house and the brave furniture and pictures,
which endeed is very noble. And being broke up, I with Sir G.
Carteret in his coach into Hyde park to discourse of things, and
spent an hour in this manner with great pleasure; telling me all his
concernments, and how he is gone through with the purchase for
my Lady Jemimah and her husband. How the Treasury is like to
come into the hands of a committee; but that not that, nor anything
else, will do our business, unless the King himself will mind his
business; and how his servants do execute their parts. He doth fear
an utter ruin in the state, and that ina
little time, if the King do not
1. To reorganise the garrison.
768
mind his business soon. That the King is very kind to him and to
my Lord Sandwich; and that he doubts not but at his coming home,
which he expects about Michaelmas, he will be very well received.
But it is pretty strange how he begun again the business of the
intention of
a marriage of my Lord Hinchingbrooke to a daughter
of my Lord Burlington’s to my Lord Chancellor; which he now
tells me as a great secret, when he told it me the last Sunday but one.
But it may be the poor man hath forgot, and I do believe he doth
make it a secret, he telling me that he hath not told it to any but
myself, and this day to his daughter my Lady Jemimah— who looks
to lie down about two months hence. After all this discourse, we
turned back and to Whitehall, where we parted; and I took up my
wife at Unthankes and so home; and in our street, at the Three Tuns
tavern door, find a great hubbub, and what was [it] but two
brothers have fallen out and one killed the other; and who should
they be but the two Fieldings, one whereof, Bazill, was page to my
Lady Sandwich; and he hath killed the other, himself being very
drunk, and so is sent to Newgate. I to the office and did as much
business as my eyes would let me, and so home to supper and to
bed.