1667-04-21

Lords day. Up, and John, a hackney coachman whomof late I
have much used, as being formerly Sir W. Penn’s coachman,
coming to me by my direction to see whether I would use him
today or no, I took him to our back gate to look upon the ground
which is to be let there, where I have a mind to buy enough to build
a coach-house and stable; for I have had it much in my thoughts
lately that it is not too much for me now, in degree or cost, to keepa
coach; but contrarily, that I am almost ashamed to be seen in a
hackney; and therefore, if I can have the conveniency, I will secure
the ground at least till peace comes, that Ido receive encouragement
1. He did not buy it.
957
to keep a coach or else that I may part with the ground again. The
place I like very well, being close by my own house, and so resolve
to go about it. And so home and with my wife to church; and then
to dinner, Mercer with us, with design to go to Hackney to church
in the afternoon. So after dinner she and I sung Scio Moro, which is
one of the best pieces of music to my thinking that ever I did hear in
my life; then took coach and to Hackny church, where very full;
and found much difficulty to get pews, I offering the sexton money
and he could not help me — so my wife and Mercer ventured into a
pew, and Iinto another. A knight and his lady very civil to me when
they came, and the like to my wife in hers, being Sir George
Viner’s; and his lady rich in Jewells, but most in beauty; almost the
finest woman that ever I saw. That which we went chiefly to see
was the young ladies of the schools, whereof there is great store,
very pretty; and also the organ, which is handsome and tunes the
psalm and plays with the people; which is mighty pretty and makes
me mighty earnest to have a pair at our church, I having almost a
mind to give thema pair ifthey would settle a maintenance on them
for it—I am mightily taken with them. So church done, we to coach
and away to Kingsland and Islington and there eat and drank at the
old house; and so back, it raininga little; which is mighty welcome,
it having not rained in many weeks, so that they say it makes the
fields just now mighty sweet; so with great pleasure home by night.
Set Mercer down, and I to my chamber and there read a great deal in
Rycaut’s Turks book with great pleasure, and so eat and to bed —
my sore throat still troubling me, but not so much. This night I do
come to full resolution of diligence for a good while, and I hope
God will give me the grace and wisdom to perform it.