1667-07-08

Upand to my chamber; and by and by comes Greeting, and to
my flagelette with him witha pretty deal of pleasure; and then to the
office, where W. Batten, W. Penn and I met about putting men to
work for the weighing of the ships in the River sunk. Then home
again and there heard Mr. Cesar play some very good things on the
lute, together with myself on the viall and Greeting on the viallin.
Then with my wife abroad by coach, she to her tailor’s, I to
Westminster to Burges about my Tanger business; and thence to
Whitehall, where I spoke with Sir John Nicholas, who tells me that
Mr. Coventry is come from Bredah as was expected; but I perceive
the certainty of peace is blown over. So called on my wife and met
804
8-9July 1667
Creed by the way, and they two andI to Charing cross, there to see
the great Boy and Girle that are lately come out of Ireland; the latter,
eight, the former four years old, of most prodigious bigness for
their age. I tried to weigh them in my arms, and find them twice as
heavy as people almost twice their age; and yet I am apt to believe
they are very young — their fathera little sorry fellow, and their
mother an old Irish woman. They have had four children of this
bigness and four of ordinary growth, whereof two of each are dead.
If (as my Lord Ormond certifies) it be true that they are no older, it
is very monstrous. So home and to dinner with my wife, and to
pipe. And then I to the office, where busy all the afternoon till the
evening; and then with my wife by coach abroad to Bow and
Stratford, it being so dusty weather, that there was little pleasure in
it; and so home and to walk in the garden, and thither comes Pelling
to us to talk; and so in and to supper, and then to bed —all the world
being, as I hear, very much damped that their hopes of peace is
become uncertain again.
9. Up pretty betimes and to the office, where busy till office time;
and then we sat, but nothing to do but receive clamours about
money. This day my Lord Anglesy, our new Treasurer, came the
first time to the Board, and there sat with us till noon; and I do
perceive he is a very notable man and understanding, and will do
things regular and understand them himself, not trust Fenn as Sir G.
Carteret did, and will solicit soundly for money; which I do fear
was Sir G. Carteret’s fault, that he did not do that enough,
considering the age we live in, that nothing will do but by
solicitation — though never so good for the King or Kingdom; and a
bad business well solicited shall for peace sake speed, when a good
one shall not. But I do confess I do think it a very bold act of him to
take upon him the place of Treasurer of the Navy at this time; but
when I consider that a regular accountant* never ought to fear
anything, nor have reason, I then do cease to wonder. At noon
home to dinner and to play on the flagelette with my wife; and then
to the office, where very busy, close at my office till late at night; at
night walked and sang with my wife in the garden, and so home to
supper and to bed. This evening news comes for certain that the
Dutch are with their fleet before Dover, and that it is expected they
will attempt something there. The business of the peace is quite
dashed again, so as now it is doubtful whether the King will
condescend to what the Dutch demand, it being so near the
805
Parliament, it being a thing that will, it may be, recommend him to
them when they shall find that the not having of a peace lies on his
side, by denying some of their demands.