1667-04-28

Lords day. Lay long, my pain in my back being still great,
though not so great as it was. However, up and to church, where a
lazy sermon; and then home and to dinner, my wife and I alone, and
Barker. After dinner by water, the day being mighty pleasant and
the tide serving finely —I up (reading in Boyles book of Colours) as
high as Barne Elmes; and there took one turn alone and then back to
Putny church, where I saw the girls of the schools, few of which
pretty. And there Icame into a pew and met withlittle James Pierce;
which I was much pleased at, the little rogue being very glad to see
me — his maister, Reader to the church. Here was a good sermon
and much company, but I sleepy andalittle out of order for my hat
falling down througha hole underneath the pulpit; which however,
after sermon, bya stick and the helpof the clerk, Igot up again. And
then walked out of the church with the boy, and then left him,
promising him to get hima play another time. And so by water, the
tide being with me again, down to Deptford; and there I walked
down the yard, Shish and Cox with me, and discoursed about
cleaning of the wet Docke; and heard (which I had before) how
when the Docke was made, a ship of near 500 Tons was there
found, a ship supposed of Queen Elizabeth’s time and well
wrought, with a great deal of stone shot in her of 18-inch Diameter,
which was shot then in use; and aferward meeting with Capt.
Perriman and Mr. Castle at Halfway Tree, they tell me of stone shot
of 36-inches Diameter which they shot out of mortar pieces.
Thence walked to Halfway Tree, and there stopped and talk with
Mr. Castle and Capt. Perriman, and so to Redriffe and took boat
again; and so honie, and there to write down my Journall, and so to
supper and to read, and so to bed — mightily pleased with my
reading Boyles book of Colours today; only, troubled that some
part of it, endeed the greatest part, I am not able to understand for
want of study.
My wife this night troubled at my leaving her alone so much and
761
keeping her within doors; which endeed I do not well nor
wisely in.