1667-01-24

Up, and to the office, full of thoughts how to order the
business of our merry meeting tonight. So to the office, where busy
all the morning. At noon home to dinner and presently to the office
to despatch my business betimes; and also we sat all the afternoon to
examine the loss of the Bredagh, which was done by as plain
negligence as ever ship was. We being rose and I ending my letters
and getting the office swept and a good fire made and abundance of
candles lighted, I home, where most of my company come of this
end of the town — Mercer and her sister — Mr. Batelier and
Pendleton —(my Ladies Pen and Pegg and Mr. Lowder; but they did
not stay long, and I believe it was by Sir W. Penn’s order, for they
had a great mind to have stayed) and also Captain Rolt; and anon, at
about 7 or 8 a-clock comes Mr. Harris of the Duke’s playhouse and
brings Mrs. Pierce with him, and also one dressed like a country
maid, witha straw hatt on, which at first I could not tell who it was,
though I expected Knipp — but it was she, comingoff thestage just
as she acted this day in The Goblins —a merry jade. Now my house is
full, and four fiddlers that play well. Harris Ifirst took to my closet,
and I find him a very curious and understanding person in all
pictures and other things — and a man of fine conversation. And so is
Rolt. So away with all my company down to the office, and there
fell to dancing and continued at [it] an hour or two — there coming
Mrs. Anne Jones, a merchant’s daughter hard by, who dances well.
And all in mighty good humour; and danced with great pleasure,
and then sung, and then danced, and then sung many things of three
voices, both Harris and Rolt singing their parts excellently. Among
other things, Harris sung his Irish song, the strangest in itself and
the prettiest sung by him that ever I heard. Then to supper in the
office, a cold good supper and wondrous merry. After supper to
dancing again and singing, and so continued till almost 3 in the
morning and then with extraordinary pleasure broke up; only,
towards morning Knipp fella little ill, and so my wife home with
her to put her to bed, and we continued dancing — and singing; and
among other things, our Mercer unexpectedly did happen to sing
an Italian song I knew not, of which they two sung the other two
parts too, that did almost ravish me and made me in love with her
718
more then ever with her singing. As late as it was, yet Rolt and
Harris would go home tonight, and walked it, though I had a bed
for them; and it proved dark, and a misly night — and very windy.
The company being all gone to their homes, I up with Mrs. Pierce
to Knipp, who was in bed; and we waked her and there I handled
her breasts and did baiser la and sing a song, lying by her on the
bed; and then left my wife to see Mrs. Pierce in bed with her in our
best chamber, and so to bed myself— my mind mightily satisfied
with all this evening’s work, and thinking it to be one of the
merriest enjoyments I must look for in the world, and did content
myself therefore with the thoughts of it, and so to bed. Only, the
Musique did not please me, they not being contented with less
then 30s.