1667-11-31

I to Westminster, and there at the lobby do hear by
Commissioner Pett to my great amazement that he is in worse
condition then before, by the coming in of the Duke of Albemarle’s
845
1667 31 October—4 November
and Prince Rupert’s narratives’ this day; wherein the former doth
most severely lay matters upon him, so as the House this day have I
think ordered him to the Tower again. I did then go down, and
there met with Coll. Reemes and Cosen Rogr. Pepys; and there
they do tell me how the Duke of Albemarle and the Prince have lay
blame on a great many; and perticularly on our office in general,
and perticularly for want of provisions, wherein I shall come to be
questioned again in that business myself; which doth trouble me.
-*NOVEMBER#-
2. Up, and to the office, where busy all the morning. At noon
home; and after dinner, my wife and Willett and I to the King’s
House and there saw Henry the Fourth; and contrary to expectation,
was pleased in nothing more then in Cartwright’s speaking of
Falstaffe’s speech about What is Honour? The house full of
Parliament-men, it being holiday with them. And it was observable
how a gentleman of good habitt, sitting just before us eating of
some fruit, in the midst of the play did drop down as dead, being
choked; but with much ado, Orange Mall did thrust her finger
down his throat and brought him to life again. After the play, we
home andI busy at the office late; and then home to supper and to
bed.
4. Sir H. Cholmly and I to the Excise Office to see what tallies are
paying; and thence back to the Old Exchange, by the way talking of
news, and he owning Sir W. Coventry in his opinion to be one of
the worthiest men in the nation —as I do really think he is. He tells
me he doth think really that they will cut off my Lord Chancellor’s
head, the Chancellor at this day showing as much pride as is
possible to those few that venture their fortunes by coming to see
him; and that the Duke of York is troubled much, knowing that
those that fling down the Chancellor cannot stop there, but will do
something to him to prevent his having it in his power hereafter to
revenge himself and father-in-law upon them. And this, Sir H.
Cholmly fears, may be by divorcing the Queen and getting
another, or declaring the Duke of Monmouth legitimate — which
1. Reports presented to the Commons’ committee on the miscarriages of the war.
846
God forbid. He tells me he doth verily believe that there will come
in an Impeachment of high treason against my Lord of Ormond;
among other things, for ordering the quartering of soldiers in
Ireland on free quarter, which it seems is high treason in that
country and was one of the things that lost the Lord Strafford his
head.