1667-02-27

Upby candlelight about 6 a-clock, it being bitter cold weather
again after all our warm weather, and by water down to Woolwich
ropeyard (Ibeing this day at a leisure, the King and Duke of York
being gone down to Sherenesse this morning to lay out the design
for a fortification there to the River Medway, and so we do not
attend the Duke of York as we should otherwise have done); and
then to the Dockyard to enquire of the state of things; and went into
Mr. Pett’s and there, beyond expectation, he did present me witha
Japan cane with a silver head, and his wife sent me by himaring
with a Woolwich stone, now much in request; which |accepted, the
value not being great and knowing that Ihad done them courtesies,
which he did own in very high terms; and then, at my asking, did
give me an old draft of an ancient-built ship, given him by his
father, of the Beare in Queen Elizabeths time. This did much please
me, it being a thing I much desired to have, to show the difference
in the built of ships now and heretofore. Being much taken with
this kindness — away to Blackwall and Deptford to satisfy myself
there about the King’s business; and then walked to Redriffe and so
home about noon; there find Mr. Hunt, newly come out of the
country, who tells me the country is much impoverished by the
greatness of taxes. The Farmers do break every day almost, and
1000! a year became not worth sool. He dined with us, and we had
good discourse of the generall ill state of things; and by the way he
told me some ridiculous pieces of thrift of Sir G. Downing’s, who is
732
their countryman — in inviting some poor people at Christmas last,
to charm the country people’s mouths; but did give them nothing
but beef porridge, pudding, and pork, and nothing said all dinner,
but only his mother would say, “‘It’s good broth, son.”” He would
answer, ‘Yes, it is good broth.” Then his lady confirm all and say,
“Yes, very good broth.” By and by she would begin and say,
“Good pork;” “Yes,” says the mother, ‘“‘good pork.’”’ Then he
cries, “Yes, very good pork.” And so they said of all things; to
which nobody made any answer, they going there not out of love
or esteem of them, but to eat his victuals, knowing him to be a
niggardly fellow — and with this he is jeered now all over the
country. After dinner with my wife by coach abroad, and set Mr.
Hunt down at the Temple and her at her brother’s. And I to
Whitehall to meet W. Coventry, but found him not. But met Mr.
Cooling, who tells me of my Lord Duke of Buckingham’s being
sent for last night by a Serjeant-at-armes to the Tower for
treasonable practices; and that the King is infinitely angry with him
and declared him no longer one of his Council — I know not the
reason of it, or occasion. To Westminster hall and there paid what I
owed for books; and so by coach took up my wife to the Exchange
and there bought things for Mr. Pierces little daughter, my
Valentine; and so to their house, where we find Knipp, who also
challengeth me for her valentine. She looks well, sang well, and
very merry we were for half an hour. Tells me Harris is well again,
having been very ill. And so we home andIto the office. So late
home and to bed.