1667-01-28

Tothe Duke’s house, and there saw Mackbeth most excellently
acted, and a most excellent play for variety. I had sent for my wife
to meet me there, who did come. And after the play done, I out so
soon to meet her at the other door, that I left my cloak in the
playhouse; and while I returned to get it, she was gone out and
missed me, and with W. Hewer away home. I, not sorry for it
much, did go to Whitehall and got my Lord Bellasses to get me into
the playhouse; and there, after all staying above an hour for the
players (the King and all waiting, which was absurd), saw Henry the
5th— well done by the Dukes people, and in most excellent habit, all
new vests, being put on but this night. But I sat so high and far off,
that I missed most of the words; and sat with a wind coming into
my back and neck, which did much trouble me. The play continued
till 12 at night; and then up, and a most horrid cold night it was, and
frosty — and moonshine. But the worst is, I had left my cloak at Sir
G. Carteret’s; and they being abed, I was forced to go home
without it. So by chance got a coach, and to the Golden Lion tavern
in the Strand and there drank some mulled sack; and so home —
where find my poor wife staying for me. And then to bed— mighty
cold.
707
1666 31 December
31. Rising this day witha full design to mind nothing else but to
make up my accounts for the year past, I did take money and walk
forth to several places in the town, as far as the New Exchange, to
pay all my debts, it being still a very great frost and good walking. I
stayed at the Fleece tavern in Covent garden, while my boy Tom
went to W. Joyces to pay what I owed for candles there. Thence to
the New Exchange to clear my wife’s score; and so going back
again, I met Doll Lane (Mrs. Martin’s sister) with another young
woman of the Hall, one Scott, and took them to the Half-Moon
tavern and there drank some burned wine with them, without more
pleasure; and so away home by coach, and there to dinner and then
to my accounts, wherein at last I find them clear and right; but to
my great discontent, do find that my gettings this year have been
573! less then my last — it being this year in all, but 2986/; whereas
the last I got 3560/. And then again, my spendings this year have
exceeded my spendings the last, by 644 — my whole spendings last
year being but 509/; whereas this year it appears Ihave spent 11541 —
which is a sum not fit to be said that ever Ishould spend in one year,
before I am maister of
a better estate then I am. Yet, blessed be God,
and I pray God make me thankful for it, I do find myself worth in
money, all good, above 6200l; which is above 1800/ more than I was
the last year. This, I trust in God, will make me thankful for what I
have, and careful to make up by care next year what by my
negligence and prodigality I have lost and spent this year. The
doing of this and entering it fair, with the sorting of all my expenses
to see how and in what points I have exceeded, did make it late
work, till my eyes became very sore and ill; and then did give over,
and supper and to bed.
Thus ends this year of public wonder and mischief to this nation—
and therefore generally wished by all people to have an end. Myself
and family well, having four maids and one clerk, Tom, in my
house; and my brother now with me, to spend time in order to his
preferment. Our healths all well; only, my eyes, with overworking
them, are sore as soon as candlelight comes to them, and not else.
Public matters in a most sad condition. Seamen discouraged for
want of pay, and are become not to be governed. Nor, as matters
are now, can any fleet go out next year. Our enemies, French and
Duch, great, and grow more, by our poverty. The Parliament
backward in raising, because jealous of the spending, of the money.
The City less and less likely to be built again, everybody settling
elsewhere, and nobody encouraged to trade. A sad, vicious,
708
31 December 1666
negligent Court, and all sober men there fearful of the ruin of the
whole Kingdom this next year — from which, good God deliver us.
One thing I reckon remarkable in my own condition is that J am
come to abound in good plate, so as at all entertainments to be
served wholly with silver plates, having two dozen andahalf.
709
abnoks
Cope
T
“y
—% JANUARY?-
2. Up I, and walked to Whitehall to attend the Duke of York as
usual. My wife up, and with Mrs. Pen to walk in the fields to frost-
bite* themselfs. I find the Court full of great apprehensions of the
French, who have certainly shipped landsmen, great numbers, at
Brest; and most of our people here guess his design for Ireland. We
have orders to send all the ships we can possible to the Downes.
God have mercy onus, for we can send forth no ships without men;
nor will men go without money, every day bringing us news of
new mutinies among the seamen — so that our condition is like to be
very miserable. Thence to Westminster hall and there met all the
Houblons, who do laugh at this discourse of the French and say
they are verily of opinion it is nothing but to send to their
plantations in the West Indys, and that we at Court do blow up a
design of invading us only to make the Parliament make more haste
in the money matters — and perhaps it may be so, but I do not
believe we have any such plots in our heads. After them, I with
several people; among others, Mr. George Mountagu, whom |
have not seen long. He mighty kind. He tells me all is like to go ill,
the King displeasing the House of Commons by evading their Bill
for examining accounts, and putting it into a commission. This
doth not please them. He tells me he finds the enmity almost over
for my Lord Sandwich, and that now all is upon the Vice
chamberlaine, who bears up well and stands upon his vindication —
which he seems to like well, and the others do construe well also. So
to the Rose tavern, while Doll Lane came to me and we did biber a
good deal de vino, et jo did give ella 12 solidos para comprar ella
some gans for a new ano’s gift. I did tocar et no mas su cosa, but in
fit time and place jo creo que je pouvais faire whatever I would con
ella. Thence to the Hall again and with Sir W. Pen by coach to the
Temple, and there light and eat at an ordinary by; and then alone to
the King’s House and there saw The Custome of the Country, the
second time of its being acted, wherein Knipp does the Widow
710
well; but ofall the plays that ever I did see, the worst, having neither
plot, language, nor anything in the earth that is acceptable. Only,
Knipp singsalittle song admirably. But fully the worst play that
ever I saw orI believe shall see. So away home, much displeased for
the loss of so much time, and disobliging my wife by being there
without her; and so by link walked home, it being mighty cold but
dry; yet bad walking because very slippery with the frost and
treading. Home and to my chamber to set down my journal; and
then to thinking upon establishing my Vows against the next year.
And so to supper and to bed.