1667-05-12

Lords day. Up, and to my chamber to settle some accounts
there; and by and by down comes my wife to mein her nightgown;
and we begun calmly, that upon having money to lace her gown for
second mourning, she would promise to wear white locks no more
in my sight; which I, like a severe fool, thinking not enough, begun
to except against and made her fly out to very high terms, and cry;
and in her heat told me of keeping company with Mrs. Knipp,
saying that if 1 would promise never to see her more (of whom she
hath more reason to suspect then I had heretofore of Pembleton),
she would never wear white locks more. This vexed me, but I
restrained myself from saying anything; but do think never to see
this woman; at least, to have her here more. But by and by Idid give
her money to buy lace, and she promised to wear no more white
locks while I lived; and so all very good friends as ever, andl to my
business and she to dress herself. Against noon we had a coach
ready for us; and she and Ito Whitehall, where Iwent to see whether
Sir G. Carteret was at dinner or no, our design being to make a visit
there, and I found them sat down, which troubled me, for I would
not then go up; but back to the coach to my wife, and she and I
homeward again; and in our way bethought ourselfs of going
alone, she and I, to a French house to dinner, and so enquired out
Monsieur Robins my periwig-maker, who keeps an ordinary, and
in an ugly street in Covent garden did find him at the door, and so
we in; and in a moment almost have the table covered, and clean
770
glasses, and all in the French manner, and a mess ofpotage first and
then a couple of pigeons a I’esteuvé, and then a piece of beeuf-a-la-
mode, all exceeding well seasoned and to our great liking; at least, it
would have been anywhere else but in this bad street and in a
periwig-maker’s house; but to see the pleasant and ready attendance
that we had, and all things so desirous to please and ingenious in the
people, did take me mightily — our dinner cost us 6s.; and so my
wife and I away and by coach to Islington, it being a fine day, and
thence to Sir G. Whitmore’s house, where we light and walked over
the fields to Kingsland and back again, a walk I think I have not
taken these twenty years but puts me in mind of my boy’s time,
when I boarded at Kingsland and used to shoot with my bow and
arrows in these fields. A very pretty place it is —and little did any of
my friends think I should come to walk in these fields in this
condition and state that I am. Then took coach again and home
through Shoreditch; and at home my wife finds Barker to have been
abroad, and telling her so many lies about it, that she struck her, and
the wench said she would not stay with her; so I examined the
wench, and found her in so many lies myself, that I was glad to be
rid of her, and so resolved of having her go away tomorrow.