1667-06-24

Up, and to the office, where much business upon me by the
coming of people of all sorts about the despatch of one business or
otherof the fireships or other ships to be set out now. This morning
Greeting came, and I with him at my flagelette. At noon dined at
home with my wife alone; and then in the afternoon, all the day at
my office — troubleda little at a letter from my father which tells me
of an idle companion, one Coleman, who went down with him and
my wife in the coach and came up again with my wife, a pensioner
of the King’s Guard and one that my wife, endeed, made the feast
for on Saturday last, though he did not come; but if he knows
nothing of our money, I will prevent any other inconvenience. In
the evening comes Mr. Povy about business, and he and Ito walk in
the garden an hour or two and to talk of State matters; he tells me his
opinion that it is out of possibility for us to escape being undone,
there being nothing in our power to do that is necessary for the
saving us —a lazy prince — no council — no money; no reputation at
home or abroad. He says that to this day the King doth fallow the
women as much as ever he did. That the Duke of York hath not got
797
1667 24 June
Mrs. Middleton, as I was told the other day; but says that he wants
not her, for he hath others and hath alway had, and that he hath
known them brought through the Matted Gallery at Whitehall into
his closet. Nay, he hath come out of his wife’s bed and gone to
others laid in bed for him. That Mr. Brouncker is not the only
pimp, but that the whole family is of the same strain, and will do
anything to please him. That, besides the death of the two princes
lately, the family is in horrible disorder by being in debt, by
spending above 60000/ per annum when he hath not 40000l. That
the Duchesse is not only the proudest woman in the world, but the
most expenseful; and that the Duke of York’s marriage with her
hath undone the kingdom by making the Chancellor so great above
reach, who otherwise would have been but an ordinary man, to
have been dealt with by other people, and he would have been
careful of managing things well, for fear of being called to account;
whereas now, he is secure and hath let things run to wrack, as they
now appear.
He tells me that the other day, upon this ill news of the Duch
being upon us, Whitehall was shut up and the Council called and sat
close (and by the way he doth assure me, from the mouth of some
privy councillors, that at this day the Privy council in general doth
know no more what the state of the kingdom as to peace and war is
then he or I, nor knows who manages it nor upon whom it
depends); and there my Lord Chancellor did make a speech to
them, saying that they knew well that he was no friend to the war
from the beginning, and therefore had concerned himself little in,
nor could say much to it; anda great deal of that kind, to discharge
himself
ofthe fault of the war—upon which, my Lord Anglesy rose
up and told his Majesty that he thought their coming now together
was not to enquire who was or was not the cause of the war, but to
enquire what was or could be done in the business of making a
peace, and in whose hands that was and where it was stopped or
forwarded; and went on very highly to have all made open to them:
he tells me, speaking of the horrid effeminacy of the King, that the
King hath taken ten times more care and pains making friends
between my Lady Castlemayne and Mrs. Steward when they have
fallen out, then ever he did to save his kingdom. That the King is at
this day every night in Hyde park with the Duke of Monmouth or
with my Lady Castlemaine. Having done all this discourse and
concluded the Kingdom in a desperate condition, we parted; and I
to my wife, with whom was Mercer and Betty Michell; we sat in
798
the garden together a while, it being night; and then Mercer and Ia
song or two, and then in (the Michells home), my wife, Mercer and
I, to supper; and then parted and to bed.