1667-06-15

All the morning at the office. No news more then last night;
only, Purser Tyler comes and tells me that he being at all the
passages in this business at Chatham, he says there have been
horrible miscarriages, such as we shall shortly hear of. That the
want of boats hath undone us; and it is commonly said, andSir J.
Mennes under his hand tells us, that they were imployed by the men
of the Yard to carry away their goods; and J hear that Comissioner
Pett will be found the first man that begun to remove; he is much
spoken against — and Brouncker is complained of and reproached
for discharging the men of the great ships heretofore. At noon Mr.
Hater dined with me, and tells me he believes that it will hardly be
the want of money alone that will excuse to the Parliament the
neglect of not setting out a fleet, it having never been [harbour-]
bound in our greatest straits; but how[ever] unlikely that it
appeared, yet when it was gone about, the State or King did
compass it; and there is something in it. In like manner, all the
afternoon busy, vexed to see how slowly things go on for want of
money. At night comes (unexpectedly so soon) Mr. Gibson, who
left my wife well and all got down well with them, but not with
himself, who (which I was afeared of and cannot blame him, but
must myself be wiser against another time) had one of his bags
broke through his breeches. And some pieces dropped out, not
many (he thinks but two, for he light and took them up, and went
back and could find no more); but Iam not able to tell how many,
which troubles me; but the joy of having the greatest part safe there
makes me bear with it, so as not to afflict myself for it. This
afternoon, poor Betty Michell, whom Ilove, sent to tell my wife
her child was dying; which I am troubled for, poor girl. At night
home and to my flagelette; played with pleasure, but with a heavy
heart; only, it pleased me to think how it may please God Imay live
to spend my time in the country with plainness and pleasure,
though but with little glory. So to supper and to bed.