1667-03-03

Lay long, merrily talking with my wife; and then up and to
church, where a dull sermon of Mr. Mills touching Originall Sin;
and then home and there find little Michell and his wife, whom I
love mightily. Mightily contented I was in their company, for I
love her much; and so after dinner Ileft them and by water from the
Old Swan to Whitehall; where walking in the galleries, | in the first
place met Mr. Pierce, who tells me the story of the death of Tom
Woodall the surgeon, killed in a drunken quarrel, and how the
Duke of York hath a mind to get him one of his places in St. Tho.
Hospitall. They do also tell me that news is this day come to the
King that the King of France is come with his army to the frontiers
of Flanders, demanding leave to pass through their country
735
1667 3 March
towards Poland, but is denied; and thereupon, that he is gone into
the country: how true this is, I dare not believe till I hear more.!
From them I walked into the park, it beinga fine but very cold day,
and there took two or three turns the length of the Pell Mell. And
there I met Serjeant Barcroft, who was sent for the Duke of
Buckingham to have brought him prisoner to the Towre. He came
to town this day; and brings word that being overtaken and outridd
by the Duchess of Buckingham, within a few miles of the Duke’s
house of Westthorp he believes, she got thither about a quarter of an
hour before him and so had time to consider — so that when he
came, the doors were kept shut against him. The next day, coming
with officers of the neighbour market-town to force open the
doors, they were open for him, but the Duke of Buckingham gone;
so he took horse presently, and heard upon the road that the Duke
of Buckingham was gone before him for London; so that he
believes he is this day also come to town before him — but no news is
yet heard of him. This is all he brings. Thence to my Lord
Chancellor; and there meeting Sir H. Cholmly, he and I walked in
my Lord’s garden and talked, among other things, of the treaty; and
he says there will certainly be a peace, but I cannot believe it. He
tells me that the Duke of Buckingham his crimes, as far as he
knows, is his being ofa Caball with some discontented persons of
the late House of Commons, and opposing the desires of the King
in all his matters in the House — and endeavouring to become
popular — and advising how the Commons’ House should proceed,
and how he would order the House of Lords —and that he hath been
endeavouring to have the King’s nativity calculated; which was
done, and the fellow now in the Tower about it — whichitself hath
heretofore, as he says, been held treason, and people died for it— but
by the Statute of Treasons, in Queen Mary’s times and since, it hath
been left out. He tells me that this silly Lord hath provoked, by his
ill-carriage, the Duke of York, my lord Chancellor, and all the great
persons, and therefore most likely will die. He tells me too, many
practices of treachery against this King; as betraying him in
Scotland and giving Oliver an account of the King’s private
councils; which the King knows very well and yet hath pardoned
him. Here I passed awayalittle time more, talking with him and
Creed, whom I met there; and so away, Creed walking with me to
Whitehall; and there I took water, and staying at Michells to drink, I
1. It was untrue.
736
home and there to read very good things in Fullers Church History
and Worthies, and so to supper; and after supper had much good
discourse with W. Hewers, who supped with us, about the Ticket
Office and the knaveries and extortions every day used there. So
parted with him, and then to bed.