1667-03-27

To Whitehall; and our business with the Duke of York being
done, W. Penn and I towards the Exchequer and in our way met Sir
G. Downing going to chapel; but we stopped, and he would go
with us back to the Exchequer and showed us in his office his chests
full, and ground and shelves full of money, and says that there is
so0oool at this day in his office of people’s money; who may demand
it this day and might have had it away several weeks ago upon the
late Act! but do rather choose to have it continue there then to put it
into the Banquier’s hands; and I must confess it is more then |
should have believed had I not seen it, and more then ever I could
have expected would have arisen for this new act in so short a time;
1. sc. on the credit of the Eleven Months Tax.
745
1667 27 March
and if it do so now already, what would it do if the money was
collected upon the Act and returned into the Exchequer so timelily
as it ought to be. But it comes into my mind here to observe what I
have heard from Sir Jo. Bankes (though I cannot fully conceive the
reason of it): that it will be impossible to make the Exchequer ever a
true bank to all intents, unless the Exchequer stood nearer the
Exchange, where merchants might with ease, while they are going
about their business, at all hours and without trouble or loss of
time, have their satisfaction; which they cannot have now with[out]
much trouble and loss of halfa day, and no certainty of having the
offices open. By this, he means a bank for common practice and use
of merchants, and therein I do agree with him. Being parted from
Sir W. Penn,and G. Downing, I to Westminster hall and there met
Balty, whom I had sent for; and there did break the business of my
getting him the place of going again as Muster-maister with
Harman this voyage to the West Indys; which endeed I do owe to
Sir W. Penn. He is mighty glad of it and earnest to fit himself for it;
but I do find, poor man, that he is troubled how to dispose of his
wife, and apparently it is out of fear of her and his honour, and |
believe he hath received some cause of this his jealousy and care.
And I
do pity him in it, and will endeavour to find out some way to
do it for him. Having put him in a wayofpreparing himself for the
voyage, I did go to the Swan; and there sent for Jervas my old
periwig-maker and he did bring mea periwig; but it was full of nits,
so as I was troubled to see it (it being his old fault) and did send him
to make it clean; and in the meantime, having stayed for him a good
while, did go away by water and to the Castle Taverne by Exeter
house and there met W. Batten, W. Penn and several others; among
the rest, Sir Ellis Layton, who doth apply himself to discourse with
me; and Ithink by his discourse, out of his opinion of my interest in
Sir W. Coventry. The manI find a wonderful witty, ready man for
sudden answers and little tales and sayings very extraordinary
witty; but in the bottom, I doubt he is not so. Yet he pretends to
have studied men; and the truth is, in several that I do know he did
give me a very inward account of them.
So I home, and there up to my wife in our chamber; and there
received from my brother the news of my mother’s dying on
Monday, about 5 or 6 a-clock in the afternoon, and that the last time
she spoke of her children was on Friday last, and her last words was,
“God bless my poor Sam!”’ The reading thereof did set me a-
weeping heartily; and so, weeping to myself a while and my wife
746
also to herself — I then spoke to my wife, recollecting myself, and
endeed having some thoughts how much better, both for her and
us, it is then it might have been had she outlived my father and me
or my happy present condition in the world, she being helpless, I
was the sooner at ease in my mind; and then found it necessary to go
abroad with my wife to look after the providing mourning to send
into the country, some tomorrow and more against Sundy, for my
family, being resolved to put myself and wife, and Barker andJane,
W. Hewers and Tom, in mourning; and my two under-maids, to
give them hoods and scarfs and gloves. So to my tailor’s and up and
down; and then home and to my officea little; and then to supper
and to bed — my heart sad and afflicted, though my judgment at
ease.