1667-07-29

To Westminster hall, where the Hall full of people to see the
issue of the day, the King being to come to speak to the House
today. One thing extraordinary was this day, a man, a Quaker,
came naked through the Hall, only very civilly tied about the
privities to avoid scandal, and with a chafing-dish of fire and
brimstone burning upon his head did pass through the Hall, crying,
“Repent! Repent!” I up to the Painted Chamber, thinking to have
got in to have heard the King’s speech, but upon second thoughts
did not think it would be worth the crowd, and so went down again
into the Hall and there walked with several; among others, my Lord
Rutherford, who is come out of Scotland, and I hope I may get
some advantage by it in reference to the business of the interest of
the great sum of money I paid him long since without interest — but
I did not now move him in it; but presently comes down the House
of Commons, the King having made them a very short and no
pleasing speech to them at all, not at all giving them thanks for their
readiness to come up to town at this busy time; but told them that
he did think he should have had occasion for them, but had none
and therefore did dismiss them to look after their own occasions till
October; and that he did wonder any should offer to bring in a
suspicion that he intended to rule by an army or otherwise then by
the laws of the land, which he promised them he would not; and so
bade them go home and settle the minds of the country in that
perticular; and only added that he hath had madea peace, which he
did believe they would find reasonable and a good peace, but did
give them none of the perticulars thereof. Thus, they are dismissed
again, to their general great distaste, I believe the greatest that ever
Parliament was, to see themselfs so fooled and the nation in certain
condition of ruin, while the King, they see, is only governed by his
lust and women and rogues about him. They do all give up the
kingdom for lost that I speak of, and do hear what the King says,
how he and the Duke of York do do what they can to get up an
army, that they may need no more Parliaments. And how my Lady
814
Castlemayne hath, before the late breach between her and the King,
said to the King that he must rule by an Army or all would be lost.
The kingdom never in so troubled a condition in this world as now;
nobody pleased with the peace, and yet nobody daring to wish for
the continuance of the war, it being plain that nothing doth nor can
thrive under us. Here I saw old good Mr. Vaughan and several of
the great men of the Commons, and some of them old men, that are
come 200 mile and more to attend this session of Parliament, and
been at great charge and disappointments in their other private
business; and now all to no purpose, neither to serve their country,
content themselfs, nor receive any thanks from the King. It is verily
expected by many of them that the King will continue the
prorogacion in October, so as, if it be possible, never to have
Parliament more. But among other things, they told me of the
strange bold sermon of Dr. Creeton yesterday before the King;
how he preach against the sins of the Court, and perticularly against
adultery, over and over instancing how for that single sin in David,
the whole nation was undone.