1667-03-14

Up, and with W. Batten and W. Penn to my Lord Treasurer’s,
where we met with my Lord Brouncker an hour before the King
came, and had time to talk a little of our business. Then came much
company; among others, Sir H. Cholmly, who tells me that
undoubtedly my Lord Bellasses will go no more as Governor to
Tanger, and that he doth put in fair for it and believes he shall have
it; and proposes how it may conduce to his account and mine in the
business of money. Here we fell into talk with Sir St. Fox; and
among other things, of the Spanish manner of walking when three
are together; and showed me how, which was pretty, to prevent
differences. By and by comes the King and Duke of York, and
presently the officers of the Ordinance were called — my Lord
Barkely, Sir Jo. Duncomb, and Mr. Chichly — then we, my Lord
Brouncker, W. Batten, W. Penn, and myself, where we find only
the King and the Duke of York and my Lord Treasurer and Sir G.
Carteret; where I only did speak, laying down the state of our
wants; which the King and Duke of York seemed very well pleased
with, and we did get what we asked, s00000!, assigned upon the
Eleven Months Tax: but that is not so much ready money, or what
will raise 40000! per week, which we desired and the business will
want. Yet are we fain to come away answered; when God knows it
will undo the King’s business to have matters of this moment put
off in this manner. The King did prevent my offering anything by
and by as Treasurer for Tanger, telling me that he had ordered us
30000! on the same tax; but that is not what we would have to bring
our payments to come within a year. So we gone out, in went
others — viz., one after another, Sir St. Fox for the army — Capt.
Cocke for sick and wounded— Mr. Ashburnham for the household.
Thence W. Batten, W. Penn and I back again, I mightily pleased
with what Ihad said and done and the success thereof. But it being a
fine clear day, I did en gayeté de Ceur propose going to Bow for ayre
sake and dine there; which they imbraced, and so W. Batten and I
(setting W. Penn down at Mark lane end) straight to Bow to the
Queen’s Head and there bespoke our dinner, carrying meat with us
from London; and anon comes W. Penn with my wife and Lady
Batten, and then Mr. Lowder with his mother and wife. While W.
739
Batten and I were alone, we had much friendly discourse, though I
will never trust him far. They being come, we to Oysters and so to
talk; very pleasant I was all day; and anon to dinner, and we made
very good company. Here till the evening, so as it was dark almost
before we got home (back again in the same method I think we
went); and spent the night talking at Sir W. Batten’s; only,alittle at
my office to look over the Victualler’s contract and draw up some
arguments for him to plead for his charges in transportation of
goods beyond the ports which the letter of one article in his contract
doth lay upon him. This done, I home to supper and to bed —
troubled a little at my fear that my Lord Brouncker should tell Sir
W. Coventry of our neglecting the office this afternoon to look
after ourpleasures; but nothing will fall upon me alone about this.