1667-11-18

Up, and all the morning at my office till 3 after noon with Mr.
Hater, about perfecting my little pocket market-book of theoffice,
till my eyes were ready to fall out of my head. And then home to
dinner, glad that I had done so much; and so abroad to Whitehall to
Commissioners of the Treasury and there didalittle business with
them; and so home, leaving multitude of solicitors at their door, of
one sort or other, complaining for want of such despatch as they
848
18-21 November 1007“
had in my Lord Treasurer’s time; when Ibelieve more business was
despatched, but it was in his manner, to the King’s wrong. Thence
took up my wife, whom I
had left at her tailor’s, and home; and
there to save my eyes, got my wife at home to read again, as last
night, in the same book, till W. Batelier came and spent the evening
talking with us, and supped with us, and so to bed.
20. Up, and all the morning at my office shut up with Mr.
Gibson, I walking and he reading to me the order-books of the
office from the beginning of the Warr, for preventing the
Parliament’s having them in their hands before I have looked them
over and seen the utmost that can be said against us from anyof our
orders — and to my great content, all the morning I found none. So
at noon home to dinner with my clerks — who have of late dined
frequently with me, and I do purpose to have them so still, by that
means I having opportunity to talk with them about business, and I
love their company very well. All the morning Mr. Hater and the
boy did shut up themselfs at my house, doing something towards
the finishing the abstract-book of our contracts for my pocket,
which] shall now want very much. After dinner Istayed at home all
the afternoon, and Gibson with me, and he and I shut up till about
10 at night; we went through all our orders and towards the end I do
meet with two or three orders for our discharging of two or three
little vessels by ticket without money, which doth plunge me; but
however, I have the advantage by this means to study an answer —
and to prepare a defence, at least for myself.
21. Up, and to the office, where all the morning; and at noon
home, where my wife not very well, but is to go to Mr. Mills’s
child’s christening, where she is godmother, Sir
J.Mennes and Sir
R. Brookes her companions. Ileft her after dinner (my clerks dining
with me) to go with Sir
J.Mennes, andI to the office, where did
much business till after candlelight; and then, my eyes beginning to
fail me, I out and took coach and to Arundell house, where the
meeting of Gresham College was broke up; but there meeting
Creed, I with him to the tavern in St. Clements churchyard, where
was Deane Wilkins, Dr. Whistler, Dr. Floyd, a divine, admitted, I
perceive, this day, and other brave men. Among the rest, they
discourse of a man that isa little frantic (that hath been a kind of
minister, Dr. Wilkins saying that he hath read for him in his church)
that is poor and a debauched man, that the College have hired for
849
20s. to have some of the blood of a Sheep let into his body; and it is
to be done on Saturday next. They purpose to let in about twelve
ounces, which they compute is what will be let in in a minutes time
by a watch. They differ in the opinion they have of the effects of it;
some think that it may have a good effect upon him as a frantic man,
by cooling his blood; others, that it will not have any effect at all.
But the man isa healthy man, and by this means will be able to give
an account what alteration, if any, he doth find in himself, and so
may be usefull. On this occasion Dr. Whistler told a pretty story
related by Muffett, a good author, of Dr. Cayus that built Key’s
College: that being very old and lived only at that time upon
woman’s milk, he, while he fed upon the milk of a angry fretful
woman, was so himself; and then being advised to take of a good-
natured patient woman, he did become so, beyond the common
temper of his age. Thus much nutriment, they observed, might do.
Their discourse was very fine; and if I should be put out of my
office, I do take great content in the liberty I shall be at of
frequenting these gentlemen’s companies.