1667-09-02

This day is kept in the City as a public fast for the fire this day
twelve months. But I was not at church, being commanded with
the rest to attend the Duke of York; and therefore with Sir J.
Mennes to St. James’s, where we had much business before the
Duke of York; and observed all things to be very kind between the
Duke of York and W. Coventry, which did mightily joy me. When
we had done, Sir W. Coventry called me down with him to his
chamber and there told me that he is leaving the Duke of York’s
service, which I was amazed at; but he tells me that it is not with the
824
2 September 1667
least unkindness on the Duke of York’s side, though he expects
(and I told him he was in the right) it will be interpreted otherwise,
because done just at this time. ““But,”’ says he, “‘I did desire it a good
while since, and the Duke of York did with much entreaty grant it,
desiring that I would say nothing of it, and that he might have time
and liberty to choose his successor without being importuned for
others whom he should not like” — and that he hath chosen Mr.
Wren; which I am glad of, he being a very ingenious man, and so
W. Coventry says of him, though he knows him little; but
perticularly commends him for the book he writ in answer to
Harrington’s Oceana, which for that reason Iintend to buy. He tells
me the true reason is that he being a man not willing to undertake
more business then he can go through, and being desirous to have
his whole time to spend upon the business of the Treasury and a
little for his own ease, he did desire this of the Duke of York. He
assures me that the kindness with which he goes away from the
Duke of York is one of the greatest joys that ever he had in the
world. I used some freedom with him, telling him how the world
hath discourse of his having offended the Duke of York about the
late business of the Chancellor; he doth not deny it, but says that
perhaps the Duke of York might have some reason for it, he
opposing him ina thing wherein he was so earnest; but tells me that
notwithstanding all that, the Duke of York doth not now, nor can
blame him — but that the Duke of York knows that he did first speak
of it to the Duke of York, before he spoke to any mortal creature
besides, which was fair dealing. I did then desire to know what was
the great matter that grounded his desire of the Chancellor’s
removal; he told me many things not fit to be spoken, and yet not
anything of his being unfaithful to the King; but, instar omnium, he
told me that while he was so great at the Council board and in the
administration of matters, there was no room for anybody to
propose any remedy to what was amiss or to compass anything,
though never so good for the Kingdom, unless approved of by the
Chancellor, he managing all things with that greatness which now
will be removed, that the King may have the benefit of others’
advice.
To Whitehall, where I met with many people; and among other
things Mr. May showed me the King’s new buildings, in order to
their having of some old sails for the closing of the windows this
winter. I dined with Sir G. Carteret, with whom dined Mr. Jack
Ashburnham and Dr. Creeton (who I observe to be a most good
825
1667 2 September
man and humble). In discourse at dinner concerning the change of
men’s humours and fashions touching meats, Mr. Ashburnham
told us that he remembers since the only fruit in request, and eaten
by the King and Queen at table as the best fruit, was the Katharine
payre, though they knew at that time other fruits of France and our
own country. After dinner comes in Mr. Townsend; and there I
was witness of a horrid rateing, which Mr. Ashburnham, as one of
the Grooms of the King’s Bedchamber, did give him for want of
linen for the King’s person; which he swore was not to be endured,
and that the King would not endure it, and that the King his father
would have hanged his wardrobe-man should he have been served
so; the King having at this day no handkerchers and but three bands
to his neck, he swore. Mr. Townsend answered want of money and
the owing of the linendraper sooo; and that he hath of late got many
rich things made, beds and sheets and saddles, and all without
money, and he can go no further; but still this old man (endeed, like
an old loving servant) did cry out for the King’s person to be
neglected. But when he was gone, Townsend told me that it is the
grooms taking away the King’s linen at the Quarter’s end, as their
Fees, which makes this great want: for whether the King can get it
or no, they will run away at the Quarter’s end with what he hath
had, let the King get more as he can. From him I went to see a great
match at tennis between Prince Rupert and one Capt. Cooke
against Bab. May and the elder Chichly, where the King was and
Court, and it seems are the best players at tennis in the nation. But
this puts me in mind of what I observed in the morning; that the
King, playing at tennis, had a Steeleyard carried to him, and I was
told it was to weigh him after he had done playing; and at noon Mr.
Ashburnham told me that it is only the King’s curiosity, which he
usually hath, of weighing himself before and after his play, to see
how much he loses in weight by playing; and this day he lost 43 1b.
Thence home and took my wife out to Mile end green and there
drank; and so home, having a very fine evening. Then home, and I
to Sir W. Batten and W. Penn and there discoursed of Sir W.
Coventry’s leaving the Duke of York and Mr. Wren’s succeeding
him; they told me both seriously, that they had long cut me out for
Secretary to the Duke of York ifever W. Coventry left him; which,
agreeing with what I have heard from other hands heretofore, doth
make me not only think that something of that kind hath been
thought on, but doth comfort me to see that the world hath such an
esteem of my qualities as to think me fit for any such thing — though
826
I am glad with all my heart that I am not so, for it would never
please me to be forced to the attendance that that would require, and
leave my wife and family to themselfs, as I must do in such a case;
thinking myself now in the best place that ever man was in to please
his own mind in, and therefore I will take care to preserve it. So to
bed, my cold remaining, though not so much, upon me.