1667-04-26

Up, and by coach with W. Batten and W. Penn to Whitehall
and there saw the Duke of Albemarle, who is not well and doth
grow crazy.* And then I took a turn with Mr. Eveling, with whom
walked two hours, till almost one of the clock — talking of the
759
1667 26 April
badness of the Government, where nothing but wickedness, and
wicked men and women command the King. That it is not in his
nature to gainsay anything that relates to his pleasures. That much
of it arises from the sickliness of our Ministers of State, who cannot
be about him as the idle companions are, and therefore give way to
the young rogues; and then from the negligence of the Clergy, that
a Bishop shall never be seen about him, as the King of France hath
always. He tells me mighty stories of the King of France, how great
a prince he is. He hath made a Code to shorten the law. He hath put
out all the ancient commanders of castles that were become
hereditary. He hath made all the Fryers subject to the Bishops,
which before were only subject to Rome and so were hardly the
King’s subjects. And that none shall become religious* but at such
an age — which he thinks will in few years ruin the pope and bring
France into a patriarchate. He confirmed to me the business of the
want of paper at the Council table the other day, which I have
observed — Wooly being to have found it, and did, being called, tell
the King to his face the reason of it. And Mr. Eveling tells me that
several of the menial servants of the Court lack bread, that have not
received a farding wages since the King’s coming in. He tells me the
King of France hath his Maistresses, but laughs at the foolery ofour
King, that makes his bastards princes, and loses his revenue upon
them — and makes his mistresses his maisters. And the King of
France did never grant Lavaliere anything to bestow on others; and
gives a little subsistence, but no more, to his bastards.
By and by we discoursed of Sir Tho. Clifford, whom I took fora
very rich and learned man, andofthe great family of that name. He
tells me he is only a man of about seven-score pound a year
—oflittle
learning, more then the law of a Justice of Peace, which he knows
well—a parson’s son, got to be Burges ina little borough in the West
and there fell into the acquaintance of my Lord Arlington, whose
creature he is and never from him. A man of virtue, and comely and
good parts enough; and hath come into his place witha great grace,
though with a great skip over the heads of
a great many, as Chichly
and Dunkum and some Lords that did expect it. By the way he tells
me that of all the great men of England, there is none that
endeavours more to raise those that he takes into favour then my
Lord Arlington; and that on that score, he is much more to be made
one’s patron then my Lord Chancellor, who never did nor will do
anything but for money. After having this long discourse, we
parted about one of the clock; and in the way met my Lady
760
Newcastle, going with her coaches and footmen all in velvet;
herself (whom I never saw before) as I have heard her often
described (for all the town talk is nowadays of her extravagancies),
with her velvet cap, her hair about her ears, many black patches
because of pimples about her mouth, naked necked, without
anything about it, and a black juste-au-corps; she seemed to me a
very comely woman — but I hope to see more of her on May day.
My mind is mightily of late upon a coach.