1667-05-20

Up betimes; and comes my Flagelette man and set me a new
tune, which I played presently and shall in a month do as much as I
desire at it. He being [gone], I to several businesses in my chamber;
and then by coach to the Commissioners of Excise, and so to
Westminster hall and there spoke with several persons I had to do
with. Having done my business, I then homeward and overtook
Mr. Comander; so took him into a coach with me, and he andI into
Lincoln’s Inne Fields, there to look upon the coach-houses to see
what ground is necessary for coach-house and horses, because of
that that Iam going about to do; and having satisfied myself in this,
he and I home and he dined with me all alone, my wife being unfit
to be seen: and so after dinner, he and I to Mr. Hides to look upon
the ground again behind our house, and concluded upon his going
along with us tomorrow to see some stables, he thinking that we
demand more room then is necessary. So away home; and then I, it
being a broken day and had power by my vows, did walk abroad;
first through the Minorys (the first time I have been over the Hill to
the postern-gate and seen that place since the houses were pulled
down about that side of the Tower since the fire) to find where my
young Mercer with my pretty little woman to his wife lives, who
lived in Lumbard street — and I did espy them, but took no notice
now of them but may do hereafter. Thence down to the Old Swan
and there saw Betty Michell, whom I have not seen since her
christening. But Lord, how pretty she is, and looks so well as ever I
saw her; and her child (which I am fain to seem very fond of)is
pretty also I think, and will be. Thence by water to Westminster
hall and there walked a while, talking at random with Sir Wm.
Doyly; and so away to Mrs. Martin’s lodging, who was gone
before expecting me; and there yo haze what yo vellem cum her,
and drank; and so by coach home (but I have forgot that I did in the
morning go to the Swan; and there tumbling of la little fille, son
uncle did trouver her cum su neckcloth off, which I was ashamed
of, but made no great matter of it but let it pass with a laugh) and
there spent the evening with my wife at our Flagelettes; and so to
supper, and after a little reading, to bed. My wife still troubled with
her cold. I find it everywhere now to be a thing doubted whether
we shall have peace or no; and the captain of one of our ships that
went with the Embassadors doth say that the seamen of Holland, to
#73
his hearing, did defy us, and called us English dogs and cried out
against peace; and that the great people there do oppose peace,
though he says the common people do wish it.