1667-06-30

Up, and to the office, where all the morning. At noon dined at
home; being, without any words, friends with my wife, though last
night I was very angry, and do think I did give her as much cause to
be angry with me. After dinner I walked to Arundell house, the
way very dusty (the day of meeting of the Society’ being changed
from Wednesday to Thursday; which Iknew not before because the
Wednesday is a Council day and several of the Council are of the
Society, and would come but for their attending the King at
Council); where I find much company, endeed very much
company, in expectation of the Duchesse of Newcastle, who had
desired to be invited to the Society, and was, after much debate pro
and con, it seems many being against it, and we do believe the town
will be full of ballets of it. Anon comes the Duchesse, with her
women attending her; among others, that Ferrabosco of whom so
much talk is, that her lady would bid her show her face and kill the
gallants. She is endeed black and hath good black little eyes, but
otherwise but
a very ordinary woman Ido think; but they say sings
well. The Duchesse hath been a good comely woman; but her dress
1. The Royal Society.
780
30 May-2 June 1667
so antic and her deportment so unordinary, that I do not like her at
all, nor did I hear her say anything that was worth hearing, but that
she was full of admiration, all admiration. Several fine experiments
were shown her of Colours, Loadstones, Microscope, and of
liquors: among others, of one that did while she was there turn a
piece of roasted mutton into pure blood — which was very rare —
here was Mr. Moore of Cambrige, whom I had not seen before, and
Iwas glad to see him ~as alsoa very pretty black boy that run up and
down the room, somebody’s child in Arundell house. After they
had shown her many experiments, and she cried still she was “‘full
of admiration,” she departed, being led out and in by several Lords
that were there; among others, Lord George Barkely and the Earl of
Carlisle and a very pretty young man, the Duke of Somersett. She
gone, I by coach home and there busy at my letters till night; and
then with my wife in the evening, singing with her in the garden
with great pleasure. And so home to supper and to bed.
+ JUNE-
2. Lords day. Up betimes, and down to [my] chamber, without
trimming myself or putting on clean linen, thinking only to keep
to my chamber to do business today; but when I came there, I find
that without being shaved I am not fully awake nor ready to settle
to business, and so was fain to go up again and dress myself;
which I did, and so down to my chamber and fell roundly to
business, and did to my satisfaction by dinner go far in the
drawing upa state of my accounts of Tanger for the new Lords
Comissioners. So to dinner, and then to my business again all the
afternoon close, when Creed came to visit me; but I did put him
off, and to my business; till anon I did make an end and wrote it
fair, with a letter to the Lords to accompany my account; which I
think will be so much satisfaction, and so soon done (their order
for my doing it being dated but May. 30), as they will not find
from any hand else. Being weary and almost blind with writing
and reading so much today, I took boat at the Old Swan, and there
up the River all alone, as high as Puttny almost; and then back
again, all the way reading and finishing Mr. Boyle’s book of
Colours, which is so Chymicall that I can understand but little of
it, but understand enough to see that he is a most excellent man.
781
So back and home, and there to supper and so to bed.