1667-04-24

By coach to Sir Jo. Duncomb’s lodging in the Pell Mell; and
there awhile sat and discoursed; and I find him that he is a very
proper man for business, being very resolute and proud and
industrious. He told me what reformation they had made in the
office of the Ordnance, taking away Legg’s fees. Have got an order
that no Treasurer after him shall ever sit at the Board, and it is a
good one — that no maister of the Ordinance here shall ever sell a
place. He tells me they have not paid any encrease of price for
anything during this war, but in most have paid less. And at this day
have greater stores then they know where to lay, if there should be
peace, and then ever was any time this war. That they pay every
man in course, and have notice of the disposal of every farding.
Every man that they owe money to hath his share of every sum they
receive. Never borrowed all this war but 30000! by the King’s
express command, but do usually stay until their assignments
become payable in their own course; which is the whole mystery,
that they have had assignments for a fifth part of whatever was
assigned to the Navy. They have powerofputting out and in of all
officers. Are beginning upon a building that will cost them 12000.
That they out of their stock of tallies have been forced to help the
Treasurer of the Navy at this great pinch. Then to talk of news: that
he thinks the want of money hath undone the King, for the
Parliament will never give the King more money without calling all
people to account; nor, as he believes, will ever make war again but
they will manage it themselfs. He says that he believes but four men
(such as he could name) would do the business of both offices, his
and ours; and if ever the war were to do again, it should be so he
believes. He told me to my face that I was a very good Clerk, and
did understand the business and do it very well, and that he would
never desire a better. He doth believe that the Parliament, if ever
they meet, will offer some alterations to the King, and will turn
some of us out. And I protest I think he is in the right, that either
they or the King will be advised to some regulation; and therefore I
ought to beware —as it is easy for me to keep myself up if
I will.