1667-07-25

Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning. At noon
home to dinner and there sang with much pleasure with my wife;
and so to the office again and busy all the afternoon. At night, Sir
W. Batten, W. Penn and myself and Sir R. Ford did meet in the
garden. I demanded of Sir R. Ford and the rest what passed today at
the meeting of the Parliament — who told me, that contrary to all
expectation by the King that there would be but a thin meeting,
there met above 300 this first day, and all the discontented party;
and endeed, the whole House seems to be no other almost. The
Speaker told them, as soon as they were sat, that he was ordered by
the King to let them know he was hindered by some important
business to come to them and speak to them as he intended; and
therefore ordered him to move that they would adjourn themselfs
till Monday next (itbeing very plain to all the House that he expects
to hear by that time of the sealing of the peace, which by letters, it
seems from my Lord Hollis, was to be sealed the last Sunday); but
before they would come to the Question whether they would
adjourne, Sir Tho. Tomkins steps up and tells them that all the
country is grieved at this new-raised standing army, and that they
thought themselfs safe enough in their Traynbands, and that
therefore he desired the King might be moved to disband them.
SII
Then rises Garraway and seconds him; only, with this explanation
(which he said he believed the other meant): that as soon as peace
should be concluded, they might be disbanded. Then rose Sir W.
Coventry and told them that he did approve of what the last
gentleman said; but also that at the same time he did no more then
what, he durst be bold to say, he knew to be the King’s mind, that as
soon as peace was concluded, he would do of himself. Then rose Sir
Tho. Littleton and did give several reasons, from the uncertainty of
their meeting again but to adjourne (in case news comes of the peace
being ended before Monday next), and the possibility of theKing’s
having some about him that may endeavour to alter his own, and
the good part of his Council’s, advice for the keeping up of the land
army; and therefore it was fit that they did present it to the King as
their desire, that as soon as peace was concluded, the land army
might be laid down, and that this their request might be carried to
the King by them of their House that were privy councillors; which
was put to the vote, and carried nemine contradicente. So after this
vote passed, they adjourned; but it is plain what the effects of this
Parliament will be if they be suffered to sit, that they will fall foul
upon the faults of the government; and I pray God they may be
permitted to do it, for nothing else I fear will save the King and
Kingdom then the doing it betimes. They gone, I to walk with my
wife in the garden, and then home to supper and to bed.