1667-05-11

Up; and being called on by Mr. Commander, he and I out to
the ground behind Sir W. Penn’s, where I am resolved to take a
lease of some ofit for a stable and coach, and so to keep a coach,
unless some change come before Ican do it; for Ido see it is a greater
_ charge to me now in hackneys and I amalittle dishonoured by
going in them. We spoke with him that hath the letting it, and I do
believe, when I can tell how much it will be fit for me to have, we
shall go near to agree. So home, and there find my door open,
which makes me very angry with Nell and do think to put her away
for it; though it doth so go against me to part with a servant, that it
troubles me more than anything in the world. So to the office,
where all the morning. At noon home to dinner, where Mr.
Goodgroome and Creed, and I have great hopes that my wife will
come to sing to my mind. After dinner, my wife and Creed and I
being entered a hackney coach to go to the other endof the town,
we espied The[oph]. Turner coming in her coach to see us — which
we were surprized at; and so light and took her and another young
lady home, and there sat and talked with The[oph]., she being lately
come out of the North after two or three years absence —she is come
to put out her sister and brothers to school at Putny. After a little
769
talk, I over Tower hill with them to a lady’s they go to visit; and so
away with my wife, whose being dressed this day in fair hair did
make me so mad, that I spoke not one word to her in our going,
though I was ready to burst with anger. So to Whitehall to the
Committee of Tanger, where they were discoursing about laws for
the civil government of that place; but so dull and so little to
purpose, that I fell to slumber; which the fear of being seen by Sir
W. Coventry did trouble me much afterwards, but I hope he did
not. After that broke up, Creed and I into the park and walked, a
most pleasant evening; and so took coach and took up my wife, and
in my way home discovered my trouble to my wife for her white
locks, swearing by God several times (which I pray God forgive me
for) and bending my fist, that I would not endure it. She, poor
wretch, was surprized with it, and made me no answer all the way
home. But there we parted, andI to the office late; and then home,
and without supper to bed, vexed.