1667-01-23

Up, and with Sir W. Batten and W. Penn to Whitehall, and
there to the Duke of York and did our usual business. Having done
there, I to St. James’s to see the Organ Mrs. Turner told me of the
other night, of my late Lord Aubigny’s; and I took my Lord
Brouncker with me, he being acquainted with my present lord
Almoner, Mr. Howard, brother of the Duke of Norfolke. So he
and I thither and did see the Organ; but I do not like it, it being but a
bawble, with avirginall joining to it —so I shall not meddle with it.
Here we sat and talked with him a good while, and he seems a good-
natured gentleman. Here I observed the Deske which he hath to
remove, and is fastened to one of the armes of his Chayre. I do also
observe the counterfeit windows there was in the form of Doores,
with Looking glasses instead of windows, which makes the room
seem both bigger and lighter I think; and I have some thoughts to
have the like in one of my rooms. He discoursed much of the
goodness of the Musique in Rome, but could not tell me how long
Musique had been in any perfection in that Church — which Iwould
be glad to know. He speaks much of the great buildings that this
Pope (whom in mirth to us he calls Antichrist) hath done in his
time. Having done with this discourse, we away; and my Lord and I
walking into the parke back again, I did observe the new buildings;
and my Lord seeing I hada desire to see them, they being the place
for the priests and Friers, he took me back to my Lord Almner and
he took us quite through the whole house and chapel and the new
Monastery, showing me most excellent pieces in Waxworke — a
crucifix given by a Pope to Mary Queene of Scotts, where a piece of
716
23 January 1667
the Cross is — two bits set in the manner of a cross in the foot ofthe
crucifix. Several fine pictures, but especially very good prints of
holy pictures. I saw the Dortoire and the Cells of the priests, and we
went into one — a very pretty little room, very clean, hung with
pictures — set with books. The priest was in his Cell — with his hair-
cloths to his skin, bare-legged, with a Sandall only on, and his little
bed without sheets, and no feather bed; but yet I thought saft
enough. His Cord about his middle. But in so good company,
living with[out] care, I thought it a very good life. A pretty Library
they have, and I was in the Refectoire, where every man his napkin
— knife —cup of earth —and basin of the same-—andaplace for one to
sit and read while the rest are at meals. And into the Kitchin I went,
where a good neck of Mutton at the fire — and other victuals boiling
—I do not think they feed very hard. Their windows looking all into
a fine garden and the park. And mighty pretty rooms all. I wished
myself one of the Capuchins — having seen what we could here, and
all with mighty pleasure. So away with the Almoner in his coach,
talking merrily about the difference in our religions, to Whitehall
and there we left him.
To the New Exchange, there to take up my wife and Mercer, and
to Temple Barr to my ordinary and had a dish of meat for them,
they having not dined; and thence to the King’s House and there
saw The Humerous Lieutenant—a silly play, Ithink —only the spirit in
it, that grows very Tall and then sinks again to nothing, having two
heads treading upon one, and then Knipps singing, did please us.
Here, in a box above, we spied Mrs. Pierce; and going out, they
called us, and so we stayed for them and Knipp took us all in and
brought to us Nelly, a most pretty woman, who acted the great
part, Coelia, today very fine, and did it pretty well; I kissed her and
so did my wife, and a mighty pretty soul she is. We also saw Mrs.
Hall, which is my little Roman-nose black girl that is mighty
pretty: she is usually called Betty. Knipp made us stay in a box and
see the dancing preparatory to tomorrow for The Goblins, a play of
Suckelings not acted these 25 years, which was pretty; and so away
thence, pleased with this sight also, and especially kissing of Nell;
we away, Mr. Pierce and I on foot to his house, the women by
coach. In our way we find the Guards of Horse in the street, and
hear the occasion to be news that the Seamen are ina mutiny, which
put me intoa great fright; so away with my wife and Mercer home,
preparing against tomorrow night to have Mrs. Pierce and Knipp
and a great deal more company to dance. And when I came home,
717
hear of no disturbance there of the seamen, but that one of them
being arrested today, others do go and rescue him. So to the office a
little, and then home to supper and to my chamber a while, and then
to bed.