1667-05-27

Up, and there comes Greeting my Flagelette-maister and I
practised with him. There came also Richardson the bookbinder
with one of Ogilby’s Bible’s in quires for me to see and buy, it being
Mr. Cade’s my stationer’s; but it is like to be so big, that I shall not
use it, it being too great to stir up and down without much trouble,
whichI shall not like nor do intend it for. So by water to Whitehall
and there found Sir G. Carteret at home; and talked with him a
while and find that the new Commissioners of the Treasury did
meet this morning. So I to find out Sir W. Coventry, but missed;
only, I do hear that they have chosen Sir G. Downing for their
Secretary; and I think in my conscience they have done a great thing
in it—for he is a busy active man, and values himself upon having of
things do well under his hand; so that am mightily pleased in their
choice. So home; and there to sing with my wife before dinner, and
then to dinner; and then abroad by [water] and stopped at the Bear-
garden stairs, there to see a Prize fought; but the house so full, there
was no getting in there; so forced to [go] through an alehouse into
the pit where the bears are baited, and upona stool did see them
fight, which they did very furiously, a butcher and a waterman.
The former had the better all along, till by and by the latter dropped
his sword out of his hand, and the butcher, whether not seeing his
sword dropped or Iknow not, but did give hima cut over the wrist,
so as he was disabled to fight any longer. But Lord, to see how ina
minute the whole stage was full of watermen to revenge the foul
play, and the butchers to defend their fellow, though most blamed
him; and there they all fell to it, to knocking down and cutting
many of each side. It was pleasant to see, but that I stood in the pit
and feared that in the tumult I might get some hurt. At last the
rabble broke up, and so I away to Whitehall; and so to St. James’s,
778
but found not Sir W. Coventry; so into the park and took a turn or
two, it being a most sweet day; and so by water home, and with my
father and wife walked in the garden, and then anon to supper and
to bed.