1667-02-12

Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning — with
several things (among others) discoursed relating to our two new
Assistant-Controllers; but especially Sir W. Penn, who is mighty
troublesome in it. At noon home to dinner, and then to the office
again and there did much business; and by and by comes Mr.
Moore, who in discourse did almost convince me that it is necessary
for my Lord Sandwich to come home and take his command at Sea
this year, for that a peace is like to be. Many considerations he did
give me hereupon which were very good, both in reference to the
public and his private condition. By and by with my Lord
Brouncker by coach to his house, there to hear some Italian
Musique; and here we met Tom Killigrew, Sir Rob. Murray, and
the Italian Seignor Baptista —- who hath composeda play in Italian
for the Opera which T. Killigrew doth intend to have up; and here
he did sing one of the acts. Himself is the poet as well as the
Musician, which is very much; and did sing the whole from the
words without any Musique pricked, and played all along upon a
Harpsicon most admirably; and the composition most excellent.
The words I did not understand, and so know not how they are
fitted; but believe very well, and all in the Recitativo very fine. But I
perceive there is a proper accent in every country’s discourse; and
that doth reach in their setting of notes to words, which therefore
cannot be natural to anybody else but them; so that I am not so
much smitten with it as it may be I should be if I were acquainted
with their accent. But the whole composition is certainly most
excellent; and the poetry, T. Killigrew and Sir R. Murray, who
understood the words, did say was excellent. I confess I was
mightily pleased with the music. He pretends not to voice, though
it be good but not excellent. This done, T. Killigrew and I to talk;
and he tells me how the Audience at his House is not above half so
much as it used to be before the late fire. That Knipp is like to make
722
12 February 1667
the best actor that ever came upon the stage, she understanding so
well. That they are going to give her 30/ a year more. That the stage
is now by his pains a thousand times better and more glorious then
ever heretofore.’ Now, wax-candles, and many of them; then, not
above 3/b. of tallow. Now, all things civil, no rudeness anywhere;
then, as in a bear-garden. Then, two or three fiddlers; now, nine or
ten of the best. Then, nothing but rushes upon the ground and
everything else mean; and now, all otherwise. Then, the Queen
seldom and the King never would come; now, not the King only
for state, but all civil people do think they may come as well as any.
He tells me that he hath gone several times, eight or ten times he
tells me, hence to Rome to hear good music; so much he loves it,
though he never did sing or play a note. That he hath ever
endeavoured, in the last King’s time and in this, to introduce good
Musique; but he never could do it, there never having been any
music here better then ballads. ““No’’, [he] says ‘“Hermitt poore and
Chivy chase was all the music we had — and yet no ordinary Fidlers
get so much money as ours do here, which speaks our rudeness
still.” That he hath gathered nine Italians from several Courts in
Christendome to come to make a consort for the King, which he
doth give 200l a year apiece to, but badly paid, and do come in the
room of keeping four ridiculous Gundilows — he having got the
King to put them away and lay out the money this way. And
endeed, I do commend him for it, for I think it is a very noble
undertaking. He doth entend to have some times of the year these
Operas to be performed at the two present Theatres, since he is
defeated in what he intended in Moore Fields on purpose of it. And
he tells me plainly that the Citty Audience was as good as the Court
— but now they are most gone.
Having done our discourse, we all took coaches (my Lord’s and
T. Killigrew’s) and to Mrs. Knepp’s chamber, where this Italian is
to teach her to sing her part. And so we all thither, and there she did
sing an Italian song or two very fine, while he played the bass upon
a Harpsicon there; and exceedingly taken Iam with her singing, and
believe she will do miracles at that and acting. Her little girl is
mighty pretty and witty. After being there an hour, and I mightily
pleased with this evening’s work, we all parted; and I took coach
and home, where late at my office and then home to enter my last
three days’ Journal; and so to supper and to bed — troubled at
1. sc. before the Civil War.
723
nothing but that these pleasures do hinder me in my business, and
the more by reasonofour being to dine abroad tomorrow, and then
Saturdy next is appointed to meet again at my Lord Brouncker’s
lodgings and there to have the whole Quire of Italians. But then Ido
consider that this is all the pleasure I live for in the world, and the
greatest I can ever expect in the best of my life; and one thing more,
that by hearing this man tonight, and I think Capt. Cooke
tomorrow and the Quire of Italians on Saturday, Ishall be truly able
to distinguish which of them pleases me truly best, which I do
much desire to know and have good reason and fresh occasion of
judging.