1667-10-05

Up, and to the office and there all the morning, none but my
Lord Anglesy and myself. But much surprized with the news of the
death of Sir W. Batten, who died this morning, having been but
two days sick. Sir W. Penn and I did despatch aletter this morning
to Sir W. Coventry to recommend Coll. Middleton, who we think
a most honest and understanding man, and fit for that place. At
833
noon home, and by coach to Temple bar to a India shop and there
bought a gown and Shash, which cost me 26s. And so [my wife]
and Willett away to the Change, and I to my Lord Crew and there
met my Lord Hinchingbrooke and Lady Jemimah, and there dined
with them and my Lord — where pretty merry. And after dinner,
my Lord Crew and Hinchingbrooke and myself went aside to
discourse about my Lord Sandwiches business, which is ina very ill
state for want of money; and so parted, and Ito my tailors and there
took up my wife and Willet, who stayed there for me, and to the
Duke of York’s playhouse; but the House so full, it being a new
play The Coffee House, that we could not get in, and so to the King’s
House; and there going in, met with Knipp and she took us up into
the Tireing-rooms and to the women’s Shift, where Nell was
dressing herself and was all unready; and is very pretty, prettier
then I thought; and so walked all up and down the House above,
and then below into the Scene-room, and there sat down and she
gave us fruit; and here I read the Qu’s to Knepp while she answered
me, through all her part of Flora’s Figarys, which was acted today.
But Lord, to see how they were both painted would make a man
mad — and did make me loath them — and what base company of
men comes among them, and how lewdly they talk —and how poor
the men are in clothes, and yet what a show they make on the stage
by candlelight, is very observable. But to see how Nell cursed for
having so few people in the pit was pretty, the other House carrying
away all the people at the new play, and is said nowadays to have
generally most company, as being better players. By and by into
the pit and there saw the play; which is pretty good, but my belly
was full of what I had seen in the House; and so after the play done,
away home and there to the writing my letters; and so home to
supper and to bed.