1667-06-12

Up very betimes to our business at the office, there hiring of
more fireships; and at it close all the morning. At noon home, and
Sir W. Penn dined with us. By and by, after dinner, my wife out by
786
12 June 1667
coach to see her mother; and I in another (being afeared at this busy
time to be seen with a woman in a coach, as if I were idle) toward
The[oph]. Turners; but met Sir W. Coventry’s boy, and there in his
letter find that the Dutch had made no motion since their taking
Sherenesse; and the Duke of Albemarle writes that all is safe as to
the great ships against any assault — the boom and Chaine' being so
fortified; which put my heart into great joy. When I came to Sir W.
Coventry’s chamber, I find him abroad; but his clerk Powell doth
tell me that ill news is come to Court of the Dutch breaking the
Chaine at Chatham, which struck me to the heart, and to Whitehall
to hear the truth of it; and there, going up the park stairs, I did hear
some lackeys speaking of sad news come to Court, saying that
hardly anybody in the court but doth look as if they cried; and
would not go into the house for fear of being seen, but slunk out and
got into a coach, and to The[oph]. Turner to Sir W. Turner’s,
where I met Roger Pepys, newly come out of the country (he and I
talked aside a little, he offering a match for Pall, one Barnes, of
whom we shall talk more the next time; his father married a Pepys).
In discourse, he told me further that his grandfather, my great
grandfather, had 800/ per annum in Queen Elizabeth’s time in the
very town of Cottenham — and that we did certainly come out of
Scotland with the Abbot of Crowland. More talk I had, and shall
have more with him, but my mind is so sad and head full of all this
ill news, that I cannot now set it down.
A short visit here, my wife coming to me, and took leave of
_ The[oph].; and so home, where all our hearts do now ake; for the
news is true, that the Dutch have broke the Chain and burned our
ships, and perticularly the Royall Charles; other perticulars I know
not, but most sad to be sure. And the truth is, I do fear so much that
the whole kingdom is undone, that I do this night resolve to study
with my father and wife what to do with the little that I have in
money by me, for I give all the rest that I have in the King’s hands
for Tanger for lost. So God help us, and God knows what disorders
we may fall into and whether any violence on this office, or perhaps
some severity on our persons, as being reckoned by the silly people,
or perhaps may by policy of State be thought fit to be condemned
by the King and Duke of York, and so put to trouble; though God
knows I have in my own person done my full duty, Iam sure. So
having with much ado finished my business at the office, I home to
1. Across the channel of the Medway.
787
consider with my father and wife of things; and then to supper and
to bed with a heavy heart. The manner of my advising this night
with my father was: Itook him and my wife up to her chamber, and
shut the door and there told them the sad state of the times; how we
are like to be all undone-—that Ido fear some violence will be offered
to this office, where all I have in the world is. And resolved upon
sending it away — sometimes into the country, sometimes my father
to lie in town and have the gold with him at Sarah Giles’s, and with
that resolution went to bed —full of fear and fright; hardly slept all
night.