1667-08-18

Lords day. Up; and being ready, walked up and down into the
streets to Creed Church to see it how it is, but I find no alteration
there, as they say there was, for my Lord Mayor and Aldermen to
come to sermon as they do every Sunday, as they did formerly to
Paul’s. Walk back home and to our own church, where a dull
sermon and our church empty of the best sort of people, they being
at their country-houses; and so home, and there dined with me Mr.
Turner and his daughter Betty. We had a good haunch of venison,
powdered and boiled, and a good dinner and merry. After dinner
comes Mr. Pelling the pothecary, whom Ihad sent for to dine with
me, but he was engaged. After sitting an hour to talk, we broke up,
all leaving Pelling to talk with my wife, and I walked toward
Whitehall; but being weary, turned into St. Dunstan’s church,
where I hear an able sermon of the Minister of the place. And stood
by a pretty, modest maid, whom I did labour to take by the hand
and body; but she would not, but got further and further from me,
and at last I could perceive her to take pins out of her pocket to prick
me if I should touch her again; which seeing, I did forbear, and was
glad I did espy her design. And then I fell to gaze upon another
pretty maid in a pew close to me, and she on me; and I did go about
to take her by the hand, which she suffered a little and then
withdrew. So the sermon ended and the church broke up, and my
amours ended also; and so took coach and home, and there took up
my wife and to Islington with her, our old road; but before we got
to Islington, between that and Kingsland, there happened an odd
adventure; one of our coach-horses fell sick of the staggers, so as he
was ready to fall down. The coachman was fain to light and hold
820
him up and cut his tongue to make him bleed, and his tail—the horse
continued shakeing every part of him, as ifhe had been in an ague a
good while, and his blood settled in his tongue, and the coachman
thought and believed he would presently drop down dead. Then he
blew some tobacco in his nose; upon which the horse sneezed, and
by and by grows well and draws us the rest of the way as well as
ever he did; which was one of the strangest things of a horse I ever
observed — but he says it is usual. It is the staggers. Stayed and eat
and drank at Islington at the old house, and so home and to my
chamber to read; and then to supper and to bed.