1667-09-04

By coach to Whitehall to the Council chamber; and there met
with Sir W. Coventry going in, who took me aside and told me that
he was just come from delivering up his seal and papers to Mr.
Wren; and told me he must now take his leave of me as a naval man,
but that he shall always bear respect to his friends there, and
perticularly to myself, with great kindness, which Ireturned to him
with thanks; and so with much kindness parted, and he into the
Council. I met with Sir Sam. Moreland, who showed me two
orders upon the Exchequer, one of 600/ and another of 4ool, for
money assigned to him, which he would have me lend him money
upon and he would allow 12 per cent. I would not meddle with
them, though they are very good; and would, had I not so much
money out already on public credit. But I see by this, his condition
will always be bad. I stayed and heard Ald. Barker’s case of his
being abused by the Council of Ireland touching his lands there. All
I observed there is the silliness of the King, playing with his dog all
the while, or his codpiece, and not minding the business, and what
he said was mighty weak; but my Lord Keeper I observe to be a
mighty able man. The business broke off without any end to it, and
so home and thence with my wife and W. Hewer to Bartholomew
fayre and there saw Polichinelli (where we saw Mrs. Clerke and all
her crew); and so to a private house and sent for a side of pig and eat
it at an acquaintance of W. Hewer’s, where there was some learned
physique and Chymical Bookes; and among others, a natural
Herball, very fine. Here we stayed not; but to the Duke of York’s
playhouse and there see Mustapha, which the more I see, the more I
like; and is a most admirable poem — and bravely acted; only, both
Batterton and Harris could not contain from laughing in the midst
of a most serious part, from the ridiculous mistake of one of the
men upon the stage — which I did not like. Thence home, where
Batelier and his sister Mary came to us and sat and talked; and so
they gone, we to supper and to bed.