1667-05-22

Upand by water to Whitehall to Sir G. Carteret, who tells me
now for certain how the Commission for the Treasury is disposed
of: viz., to Duke of Albemarle, Lord Ashly, Sir W. Coventry, Sir
Jo. Duncum, and Sir Tho. Clifford; at which he says all the whole
Court is disturbed, it having been once concluded otherwise, but all
ofa sudden the King’s choice was changed, and these are to be the
men; the first of which is only for a puppet to give honour to the
rest. He doth presage that these men will make it their business to
find faults in the management of the late Lord Treasurer and in
discouraging the banquiers; but I am (whatever I in compliance do
say to him) of another mind, and my heart is very gladofit; for Ido
expect they will do much good, and that it is the happiest thing that
775
1667 22 May
hath appeared to me for the good of the nation since the King came
in. Thence to St. James’s and up to the Duke of York; and there in
his chamber Sir W. Coventry did of himself take notice of this
business of the Treasury, wherein he is in the Commission, and
desired that I would be thinking of anything fit for him to be
acquainted with for the lessening of charge and bettering of our
credit; and what our expense hath been since the King’s coming
home, which he believes will be one of the first things they shall
enquire into — which I promised him; and from time to time, which
he desires, give him an account of what I can think of worthy his
knowledge. So into the Duke of York’s closet; and there, among
other things, Sir W. Coventry did take notice of what he told me
the other day, about a report of Comissioner Pett’s dealing for
timber in the Navy and selling it to us in other names; and besides
his own proof did produce a paper I had given him this morning
about it, in the case of Widow Murford and Morecocke — which
was so handled, that the Duke of York grew very angry, and
commanded us presently to fall into the examination of it, saying
that he would [not] trust a man for his sake that lifts up the whites of
his eyes. And it was declared that if he be found to have done so, he
should be reckoned unfit to serve the Navy. AndIdo believe he will
be turned out; and it was methought, a worthy saying of W.
Coventry to the Duke of York —“‘Sir,”’ says he, “I do not make this
complaint out of any disrespect to Comissioner Pett, but because I
do love to do these things fairly and openly.”
And so home; and by and by comes my poor father, much better
then I expected, being at ease by fits, according as his truss sits, and
another time in as much pain. I am mighty glad to see him come
well to town. So to dinner, where Creed comes. After dinner, my
wife and father abroad; and Creed and I also by water, and parted at
the Temple stairs; where I landed and to the King’s house, where I
did give 18d. and saw the two last acts of The Goblins, a play I could
not make anything of by those two acts; but here Knipp spied me
out of the tiring-room and came to the pit door: and I out to her and
kissed her, she only coming to see me, being in a country-dress, she
and others having it seemed had a country-dance in the play, but she
no other part; so we parted, and I into the pit again till it was done.
The house full, but I had no mind to be seen; but thence to my
cutler’s and two or three other places on small errands; and so
home, where my father and wife come home; and pretty well, my
father, who to supper and betimes to bed at his country hours.
776
26 May 1667
26. Lords day. Up sooner then usual on Sundays, and to walk, it
being exceeding hot all night (so as this night Ibegin to leave offmy
waistcoat this year) and this morning; and so to walk in the garden
till toward church time, when my wife and I to church; where
several strangers of good condition came to our pew, where the
pew was full. At noon dined at home, where little Michell came,
and his wife, who continues mighty pretty. After dinner, Iby water
alone to Westminster, where not finding Mrs. Martin within, did
go toward the parish church and in the way did overtake her, who
resolved to go into the church with her that she was going with
(Mrs. Hargrave, the little crooked woman, the vintner’s wife of the
Dog) and then go out again; and so I to the church; and seeing her
return, did go to go out again myself, but met with Mr. Howlett,
who offering me a pew in the gallery, I had no excuse but up with
him I must go, and there, much against my will, stayed out the
whole church in pain, while she expected me at home; but I did
entertain myself with my perspective glass up and down the
church, by which I had the greatest pleasure of seeing and gazing a
great many very fine women; and what with that and sleeping, I
passed away the time till sermon was done; and then to Mrs. Martin
and there stayed with her an hour or two, and there did what jo
would with her. And after having been here so long, I away to my
boat, and up with it as far as Barne Elmes, reading of Mr. Eveling’s
late new book against Solitude, in which I do not find much excess
of good matter, though it be pretty for a by-discourse. I walked the
length of the Elmes, and with great pleasure saw some gallant ladies
and people, come with their bottles and basket[s] and chairs and
forms|[s] to sup under the trees by the waterside, which was mighty
pleasant. I to boat again and to my book; and having done that, I
took another book, Mr. Boyles of Colours, and there read where |
left, finding many fine things worthy observation. And so landed at
the Old Swan and so home, where I find my poor father newly
come out of an unexpected fit of his pain, that they feared he would
have died. They had sent for me to Whitehall and all up and down,
and for Mr. Holliard also, who did come. But W. Hewers being
here did I think do the business, in getting my father’s bowel, that
was fallen down, into his body again. But above all things, the poor
man’s patience under it, and his good heart and humour as soon as
he was out ofit, did so work upon me, that my heart was sad to
think of his condition; but do hope that a way will be found by a
steele truss to relieve him. By and by to supper, all our discourse
ee
about Brampton, and my intentions to build there ifI could be free
of my engagement to my Uncle Tho. and his son, that they may not
have what I have built, against my will, to them, whether I will or
no, in case of my and my brothers being without heirs males —
which is the true reason why I am against laying out money upon
that place, together with my fear of some inconvenience by being
so near Hinchingbrooke; being obliged to be a servant to that
family, and subject to what expenses they shall cost me, and to have
all that I shall buy or do esteemed as got by the death of my Uncle;
when endeed, what I have from him is not worth naming. After
supper, I to read and then to bed.