1667-03-17

Lords day. Up betimes with my wife, and by coach with Sir
W. Penn and Sir Tho. Allen to Whitehall; there my wife and I the
first time that ever we went to my Lady Jemimah’s chamber at Sir
Edw. Carteret’s lodgings. I confess I have been much to blame and
much ashamed of our not visiting her sooner, but better now then
never. Here we took her before she was up, which I was sorry for,
so only saw her and away to chapel, leaving further visit till after
sermon. I put my wife into the pew below in the chapel; but it was
pretty to see (myself being but in a plain band, and every way else
ordinary) how the verger took me for her man I think; and I was
fain to tell him she was a kinswoman of my Lord Sandwiches, he
saying that none under Knight Baronets ladies are to go into that
pew. So she being there, I to the Duke of York’s lodging, where in
his dressing-chamber he talking of his Journy tomorrow or next
day to Harwich -to prepare some fortifications there; so that we are
wholly upon the defensive part this year; only, we have some
expectations that we may by our squadrons annoy them in their
trade by the North of Scotland and to the Westward. That done, Ito
walk in the parke, where to the Queenes chapel and there heard a
Fryer preach, with his Cord about his middle, in Portuguez —
something I could understand, showing that God did respect the
meek and humble as well as the high and rich. He was full of action;
but very decent and good I thought, and his manner of delivery
very good. I went back to Whitehall, and there up to the closet and
spoke with several people till sermon was ended, which was
preached by the Bishop of Hereford, an old good man, that they say
made an excellent sermon. He was by birth a Catholique anda
great
gallant, having 1500] per annum patrimony, and is a Knight-
741
Barronet — was turned from his persuasion by the late Archbishop
Laud. He and the Bishop of Exeter, Dr. Ward, are the two Bishops
that the King doth say he cannot have bad sermons from. Here I
met with Sir H. Cholmly, who tells me that undoubtedly my Lord
Bellasses doth go no more to Tanger, and that he doth believe he
doth stand in a likely way to go Governor — though he says, and
showed me, a young silly Lord (one Lord Allington) who hath
offered a great sum of money to go; and will put hard for it, he
havinga fine lady and a great man would be glad to have him out of
the way.