1667-04-19

Up, and to the office all the morning, doing a great deal of
business. At noon to dinner betimes; and then my wife and I by
coach to the Duke’s House, calling at Lovetts, where Ifind my Lady
Castlemaynes picture not yet done, which has lain so many months
756
there; which vexes me, but I mean not to trouble them more after
this is done. So to the playhouse, where not much company come,
which I impute to the heat of the weather, it being very hot. Here
we saw Macbeth, which thoughI have seen it often, yet is it one of
the best plays for a stage, and variety of dancing and music, that
ever Isaw. So being very much pleased, thence home by coach with
young Goodyer and his own sister, who offered us to go in their
coach—a good-natured youthI believe he is, but Ifear will mind his
pleasures too much; she is pretty, and a modest, brown girl. Set us
down; so my wife and I into the garden, a fine moonshine evening,
and there talking; and among other things, she tells me that she
finds by W. Hewer that my people do observe my minding my
pleasure more then usual; which I confess and am ashamed of, and
so from this day take upon me to leave it till Whit-Sunday. While
we were setting there in the garden, comes Mrs. Turner to advise
about her son, the Captain; which I did give her the best advice I
could, to look out for some land imployment for him — a peace
being at hand, when few ships will be imployed, and very many,
and those old Captains, to be provided for — which she thanked me
for. Then to other talk: and among the rest, about Sir W. Penn’s
being to buy Wansted house of Sir Rt. Brookes, but hath put him
off again; and left him the other day to pay for a dinner at a tavern,
which she says our parish[ioner] Mrs. Hollworthy talks of. And I
dare be hanged if ever he could mean to buy that great house,' that
knows not how to furnish one that is not the tenth part so big.
Thence Ito my chamber to write a little; and then to bed, having got
a mighty cold in my right eare and side of my throat, and in much
trouble with it almost all the night.