1667-03-28

Up, and there comes to me Drumbleby withaflagelette made
to suit with my former, and brings me one Greeting, a master to
teach my wife. I agree by the whole with him, to teach her to take
out any lesson ofherself for 4/. She was not ready to begin today,
but doth tomorrow. So I to the office, where my Lord Brouncker
and I only, all the morning, and did business. At noon to the
Exchange and to Sir Rob. Viner’s about settling my accounts there.
So back home and to dinner, where Mr. Holliard dined with us —
and pleasant company he is. I love his company and he secures me
against ever having the stone again. He gives it me as his opinion
that the City will never be built again together as is expected while
any restraint is laid upon them. He hath beena great loser, and
would bea builder again; but he says he knows not what restrictions
there will be, so as it is unsafe for him to begin. He gone, I to the
#33
1667 28 February—1 March
office and there busy till night, doing much business; then home
and to my accounts; wherein, beyond expectation, I succeeded so
well as to settle them very clear and plain, though by borrowing of
monies this month to pay D. Gawden and chopping and changing
with my Tanger money, they were become somewhat intricate.
And blessed be God, upon the evening my accounts, I do appear
6800! creditor. This done, I to supper about 12 at night, and so to
bed —the weather for three or four days being come to be exceeding
cold again, as any time this year. I did within these six days see
smoke still remaining of the late fire in the City; and it is strange to
think how to this very day I cannot sleep a-night without great
terrors of fire; and this very night could not sleep till almost 2 in the
morning through thoughts of fire. Thus this month is ended with
great content of mind to me-thriving in my estate, and my matters
in my offices going pretty well as to myself. This afternoon Mr.
Gawden was with me, and tells me more then I knew before: that he
hath orders to get all the victuals he can to Plymouth and the
Western ports and other outports, and some to Scotland; so that we
do entend to keep buta flying fleet this year; which it may be may
preserve us a year longer, but the end of it must be ruin. Sir J.
Mennes this night tells me that he hears for certain that ballads are
made of us in Holland for begging of
a peace; which I expected, but
am vexed at. So ends this month, with nothing of weight upon my
mind but for my father and mother, who are both ill and have been
so for some weeks — whom God help, but I do fear my poor father
will hardly be ever thoroughly well again.
—# MARCH 4-
1. Inthe street in Mark lane do observe (it being St. Davids’ day)
the picture of a man dressed like a Welchman, hanging by the neck
upon one of the poles that stand out at the top of one of the
merchants’ houses, in full proportion and very handsomely done —
which is one of the oddest sights Ihave seen a good while, for it was
so like a man that one would have thought it was endeed a man.
Being returned home, I find Greeting the flagelette-master come
and teaching my wife; and I do think my wife will take pleasure in
it, and it will be easy for her and pleasant — so I, as I am well
contented with the charge it will occasion me. So to the office till
734
dinner, busy; and then home to dinner, and before dinner making
my wife to sing; poor wretch, her ear is so bad that it made me
angry, till the poor wretch cried to see me so vexed at her, that I
think I shall not discourage her so much again but will endeavour to
make her understand sounds and do her good that way, for she hath
a great mind to learn, only to please me; and therefore Iam mighty
unjust to her in discouraging her so much. But we were good
friends, and to dinner; and. had she not been ill with those and that it
were not Friday (on which in Lent there are no plays), I had carried
her to a play. But she not being fit to go abroad, I to the office;
where all the afternoon close, examining the collection of my
papers of the accounts of the Navy since this war to my great
content; and so at night home to talk and sing with my wife; and
then to supper and so to bed with great pleasure.