1667-10-22

Slept but ill all the last part of the night, for fear of this day’s
success in Parliament; therefore up, and all of us all the morning
close, till almost 2 a-clock, collecting all we had to say and had done
from the beginning touching the safety of the River Medway and
1. The Battle of Lowestoft, June 1665.
843
1667 22 October
Chatham; and having done this and put it into order, we away, Inot
having time to eat my dinner; and so all in my Lord Brouncker’s
coach (that is to say, Brouncker, W. Penn, T. Harvy, and myself),
talking of the other great matter with which they charge us, that is,
of discharging men by ticket, in order to our defence in case that
should be asked. We came to the Parliament door; and there, after a
little waiting till the Committee was sat, we were, the House being
very full, called in (Sir W. Penn went in and sat as a Member; and
my Lord Brouncker would not at first go in, expecting to have a
chair set for him; but after a few words I had occasion to mention
him, and so he was called in, but without any more chair or respect
paid him then myself); and so Brouncker and T. Harvy and I were
there to answer, and I had a chair brought for me to lean my books
upon; and so did give them such an account, ina series, of the whole
business that had passed the office touching the matter, and so
answered all Questions given me about it, that I did not perceive
but they were fully satisfied with me and the business as to our
Office; and then Comissioner Pett (who was by at all my discourse,
and this held till within an hour after candlelight, for I had candles
brought in to read my papers by) was to answer for himself, we
having lodged all matters with him for execution. But Lord, what a
tumultuous thing this committee is, for all the reputation they have
of a great council, is a strange consideration; there being as
impertinent Questions, and as disorderly proposed, as any man
could make. But Comissioner Pett, of all men living, did make the
weakest defence for himself; nothing to the purpose nor to
satisfaction nor certain, but sometimes one thing and sometimes
another, sometimes for himself and sometimes against him; and his
greatest failure was (that I observed) from his not considering
whether the Question propounded was his part to answer to or no,
and the thing to be done was his work to do — the want of which
distinction will overthrow him; for he concerns himselfin giving an
account of the disposal of the boats, which he had no reason at all to
do, or take any blame upon him for them. None of my Brethren
said anything but myself; only two or three silly words my Lord
Brouncker gave, in answer to one Question about the number of
men there in the King’s yard at that time. At last the House
dismissed us, and shortly after did adjourne the debate till Friday
next; and my Cosen Pepys did come out and Joy me in my
acquitting myself so well, and so did several others, and my fellow-
officers all very briske to see themselfs so well acquitted — which
844
makes mealittle proud, but yet not secure but we may yet meet
with a back-blow which we see not. So, with our hearts very light,
Sir W. Penn andI in his coach home, it being now near 8 a-clock;
and so to the office and did a little business by the post, and so
home, hungry, and eat a good supper and so, with my mind well at
ease, to bed — my wife not very well of those.