1667-10-07

Up betimes, and did do several things towards the settling all
matters, both of house and office, in order for my journey this day;
and did leave my chief care, and the key of my closet, with Mr.
Hater, with direction what papers to secure in case of fire or other
accident; and so about 9 a-clock, Iand my wife and Willett set out in
a coachI have hired, with four horses, and W. Hewer and Murford
rode by us on horseback; and so, my wife and she in their morning
gowns, very handsome and pretty and to my great liking, we set
out; and so out at Allgate and so to the Greenman and so on to
Enfield, in our way seeing Mr. Louther and his lady in a coach
going to Walthamstow, and he told us that he would overtake us at
night, he being to go that way. So we to Enfield and there bayted, it
being but a foul, bad day; and there Louther and Mr. Burford, an
acquaintance of his, did overtake us, and there drank and eat
together; and by and by we parted, we going before them; and very
merry, my wife and girl and [I], talking and telling tales and
singing; and before night did come to Bishop stafford, where
Louther and his friend did meet us again and carried us to the
Raynedeere, where Mrs. Aynsworth (who lived heretofore at
Cambrige and whom I knew better then they think for, doth live -
it was the woman that, among other things, was great with my
Cosen Barmston of Cottenham, and did use to sing to him and did
teach me Full forty times over, a very lewd song) doth live, a woman
they are well acquainted with, and is here what she was at
Cambrige, and all the goodfellows of the country come hither.
Louther and his friend stayed and drank and then went further this
night, but here we stayed and supped and lodged. But as soon as
they were gone and my supper getting ready, I fell to write my
letter to my Lord Sandwich, which I could not finish before my
coming from London; so did finish it to my good content, and a
good letter, telling him the present state of all matters; and did get a
man to promise to carry it tomorrow morning to be there at my
house by noon, andI paid him well for it. So that being done and
my mind at ease, we to supper and so to bed, my wife and I in one
bed and the girl in another in the same room. And lay very well, but
there was so much tearing company in the house, that we could not
see my landlady, so I had no opportunity of renewing my old
acquaintance with her. But here we slept very well.