1667-01-16

Up, and by coach to Whitehall — and there to the Duke of |
York as usual. Here Sir W. Coventry came to me aside in the
Duke’s chamber, to tell that he had not answered part of
a late letter
of mine, because littera Scripta manet — about his leaving the office —
he tells me because he finds that his business at Court will not
permit him to attend it; and then he confesses that he seldomoflate
could come from it with satisfaction, and there[fore] would not
take the King’s money for nothing. I professed my sorrow for it,
and prayed the continuance of his favour; which he promised. I do
believe he hath done like a very wise man in reference to himself;
but I doubt it will prove ill for the King and for the office. Prince
Rupert, I hear today, is very ill — yesterday given over, but better
today. This day before the Duke of York, the business of the
Mustermaisters was reported, and Balty found the best of the
whole number, so as the Duke enquired who he was and whether
vrs
1667 16 January
he was a stranger by his two names, both strange. And offered that
he and one more, who hath done the next best, should have not
only their own, but part of the others’ salary; but that, Ihaving said
he was my brother-in-law, did stop; but they two are ordered their
pay, which I am glad of, and someofthe rest will lose their pay and
others be laid by the heels. I was very glad of this being ended so
well. Then with the Duke of York to the King to receive his
commands for stopping the sale this day of some prize goods at the
Prize Office, goods fit for the Navy, and received the King’s
commands and carried them to the Lords’ House to my Lord
Ashly, who was angry much thereat; and ] am sorry it fell to me to
carry thatorder, but I cannot help it; so against his will, he signed a
note I writ to the Commissioners of Prizes, which I carried and
delivered to Kingdom at their new office in Aldergate Streete.
Thencealittle to the Exchange, where it was hot that the Prince was
dead, but I did rectify it. So home to dinner and found Balty, told
him the good news, and then after dinner away; I presently to
Whitehall and did give the Duke of York a memorial of the salt
business against the Council. And did wait all the Council for
answer — walking a good while with Sir St. Fox; who, among other
things, told me his whole mystery in the business of the interest he
pays as Treasurer for the Army. They give him 12d. per cent quite
through the Army, with condition to be paid weekly. This he
undertakes upon his own private credit, and to be paid by the King
at the end of every four months. If the King pay him not at the end
of the four months, then for all the time he stays longer, my Lord
Treasurer by agreement allows him8 per cent per annum for the
forebearance — so that in fine, he hath about twelve per cent from
the King and the Army for fifteen or sixteen months’ interest — out
of which he gains soundly, his expense being about 130000! per
annum — and hath no trouble in it compared (as I told him) to the
trouble I must have to bring in an account of interest. I was,
however, glad of being thus enlightened. And so away to the
council door, and there got in and hear a piece of a cause heard
before the King, about a ship deserted by her fellows (who were
bound mutually to defend each other) in their way to Virginy and
taken by the enemy — but it was but meanly pleaded.
This day Iobserve still in many places the smoking remains of the
late fire. The ways mighty bad and dirty. This night Sir R. Ford
told me how this day at Christ Church Hospital they have given a
living of 200! per annum to Mr. Sanchy, my old acquaintance;
714
which Iwonder at, he commending him mightily; but am glad ofit.
He tells me too, how the famous Stillingfleete was a Bluecoat boy.
The children at this day are provided for in the country by the
House, which I am glad also to hear.