1667-07-27

Up and to the office, where I hear that Sir John Coventry is
come over from Bredagh’ (a nephew I think of Sir W. Coventry’s);
but what message he brings I know not. This morning, news is
come that Sir Jos. Jordan is come from Harwich with 16 fireships
and 4 other little ships-of-war; and did attempt to do some
execution upon the enemy, but did it without discretion as most do
say, so as that they have been able to do no good, but have lost 4 of
their fireships. They attempted, it seems, when the wind was too
strong, that our grapplings would not hold; others say we came to
leeward of them, but all condemn it as a foolish management.
They are come to Sir Edwd. Spragg about Lee, and the Duch are
below at the Noure. At the office all the morning; and at noon to the
Change, where I met Fenn and he tells me that Sir Jo. Coventry
doth bring the confirmation of the peace; but I do not find the
1. Where the peace treaty was being negotiated.
812
Change at all glad of it, but rather the worse, they looking upon it as
a peace made only to preserve the King for a time in his lusts and
ease, and to sacrifice trade and his kingdoms only to his own
pleasures; so that the hearts of merchants are quite down. He told
me that Sir G. Carteret was at this end of the town; so I went to visit
him in Broad street, and there he and I together. He tells me, as to
news, that the peace is now confirmed and all that over. He says it
was a very unhappy motion in the House the other day about the
land army; for whether the King hath a mind of his own to do the
thing desired or no, his doing it will be looked upon as a thing done
only in fear of the Parliament. He says that the Duke of York is
suspected to be the great man that is for raising of this army and
bringing things to be commanded by an army; but he believes that
he is wronged, and says that he doth know that he is wronged
therein. He doth say that the Court is in a way to ruin all for their
pleasures; and says that he himself hath once taken the liberty to tell
the King the necessity of having at least a show of religion in the
government, and sobriety; and that it was that that did set up and
keep up Oliver, though he was the greatest rogue in the world. And
that it is so fixed in the nature of the common Englishman, that it
will not out of him. He tells me that while all should be labouring to
settle the Kingdom, they are at Court all in factions, some for and
others against my Lord Chancellor, and another for and against
another man; and the King adheres to no man, but this day delivers
himself up to this and the next to that, to the ruin of himself and
business. That he is at the command of any woman likeaslave,
though he be the best man to the Queene in the world, with so
much respect and never lies a night from her; but yet cannot
command himself in the presence of a woman he likes. Having had
this discourse, I parted and home to dinner, and thence to the office
all the afternoon to my great content, very busy. It raining this day
all day to our great joy, it having not rained J think this month
before, so as the ground was everywhere as burned and dry as could
be — and no travelling in the road or streets in London for dust. At
night, late home to supper and to bed.