1667-03-04

Up, and with Sir J. Mennes and W. Batten by barge to
Deptford by 8 in the morning, where to the King’s yardalittle to
look after business there, and then toa private storehouse to look
upon some cordage of Sir W. Batten’s; and there being a hole
formerly made for a drain for Tarr to run into, wherein the barrel
stood still full of stinking water, Sir W. Batten did fall with one leg
into 1t; which might have been very bad to him, by breakingaleg or
other hurt, but thanks be to God he only sprained his foot a little. So
after his shifting his stocking at a strong-water shop close by, we
took barge again and so to Woolwich, where our business was
chiefly to look upon the ballast-wharf there, which is offered us for
the King’s use to hire. But we do not think it worth the laying-out
much money upon, unless we could buy the fee-simple of it; which
cannot be sold us, so we wholly flung it off. So to the Dockyard and
there stayed a while, talking about business of the yard, and thence
to the Ropeyard; and so to the White Hart and there dined, and
Capt. Cocke with us, who we find at the Ropeyard; and very merry
at dinner, and many pretty tales of Sir J. Mennes, which I have
entered in my tale book. But by this time Sir W. Batten was come to
be in much pain in his foot, so as he was forced to be carried down in
a chair to the barge again; and so away to Deptford, and there I a
little in the yard; and then to Bagwells, where I find his wife
washing, and I did hazer todo que jo voudrais con her; and then sent
for her husband and discoursed of his going to Harwich this week
to his charge of the new ship building there which I have got him —
and so away, walked to Redriffe and there took boat and away
home, upon Tower hill, near the Ticket Office, meeting with my
old acquaintance Mr. Chaplin the cheesemonger; and there fell to
talk of news and he tells me that for certain the King of France is
denied passage with his army through Flanders — and that he hears
the Dutch do stand upon high terms with us, and will have a
promise of not being obliged to strike the flag to us before they will
treat with us, and other high things which I am ashamedof and do
hope will never be yielded to. That they do make all imaginable
preparations, but that he believes they will be in mighty want of
13%
men. That the King of France doth court us mightily. He tells me
too, that our Lord Treasurer is going to lay down, and that my Lord
Arlington is to be Lord Treasurer; but Ibelieve nothing of it— for he
is not yet of an estate visible enough to have that charge I suppose
upon him. So being parted from him, Ihome to the office; and after
having done business there, I home to supper; and there mighty
pleased with my wife’s beginning on the Flagelette, believing that
she will come to [play] very well thereon. So to bed. This day in the
barge I took Berchensha’s translation of Alsted his Templum; but
the most ridiculous book, as he hath translated it, that ever I saw in
my life; I declaring that I understood not three lines together, from
one end of the book to the other.