1667-06-10

Up; and news brought us that the Dutch are come up as high
as the Nore. W. Batten, W. Penn and Ito St. James, where the Duke
of York gone this morning betimes to send away some men down
to Chatham. So we three to Whitehall and met Sir W. Coventry,
who presses all the possible for fireships; so we three to the office
784
10 June 1667
presently, and thither comes Sir Fr. Hollis, who is to command
them all in some exploits he is to do with them on the enemy in the
river. So we all down to Deptford and pitch upon ships and set men
at work; but Lord, to see how backwardly things move at this
pinch, notwithstanding that by the enemy’s being now come up as
high as almost the Hope, Sir
J.Mennes (who was gone down to pay
some ships there) hath sent up the money; and so we are possessed
of money to [do] what we will with. Here I eat a bit; and then in the
afternoon took boat and down to Greenwich, where find the stairs
full of people, there being a great Riding there today for a man, the
constable of the town, whose wife beat him. Here I was with much
ado fain to press two watermen to make mea galley; and so to
Woclwich to give order for the despatch ofa ship Ihave taken under
my care to see despatched; and orders being so given, I, under
pretence to fetch up the ship, which lay at Grays (the Golden hand),
did do that in my way; and went down to Gravesend, where I find
the Duke of Albemarle just come, with a great many idle lords and
gentlemen with their pistols and fooleries, and the Bulworke not
able to have stood halfan hour had they come up; but the Dutch are
fallen down from the Hope and Shell haven as low as the
Sheernesse, and we do plainly at this time hear the guns play. Yet I
do not find the Duke of Albemarle entends to go thither, but stays
here tonight and hath (though the Dutch are gone) ordered our
frigates to be brought in a line between the two block-houses! —
which I took then to be a ridiculous thing. So I away into the town
_ and took a Captain or two ofour ships (who did give me an account
of the proceedings of the Dutch fleet in the river) to the tavern and
there we eat and drank; and I find the town had removed most of
their goods out of the town, for fear of the Duch coming up to
them; and Sir Jo. Griffen [told me] that last night there was not
twelve men to be got in the town to defend it — which the master of
the house tells mie is not true; but that the men of the town did
entend to stay, though they did endeed, and so had he (at the Ship),
removed their goods. Thence went off to an Ostend man-of-war,
Just now come up, who met the Dutch fleet, who took three ships
that he came convoying hither from him — says they are as low as
the Nore or thereabouts. So I homeward, as long as it was light
reading Mr. Boyles book of Hydrostatickes, which is a most
excellent book as ever I read; and I will take much pains to
1. At Gravesend.
785
understand him through if I can, the doctrine being very useful.
When it grew too dark to read, Ilay down and took a nap, it being a
most excellent fine evening; and about one a-clock got home, and
after having wrote to Sir W. Coventry an account of what I had
done and seen (which is entered in my letter-book), I to bed.