1667-11-15

To Westminster, and there I walked with several and do hear
that there is to be a conference between the two Houses today; so I
stayed, and it was only to tell the Commons that the Lords cannot
847
agree to the confining or sequestering of the Earle of Clarendon
from Parliament, forasmuch as they do not specify any perticular
crime which they lay upon him and call treason. This the House did
receive, and so parted; at which, I hear the Commons are like to
grow very high, and will insist upon their privileges and the Lords
will on theirs — though the Duke of Buckingham, Bristoll and
others have been very high in the House of Lords to have had him
committed. This is likely to breed ill blood. Thence I away home
(calling at my Mercer and tailor’s) and there find, as Iexpected, Mr.
Cesar and little Pellam Humphrys, lately returned from France and
is an absolute Monsieur, as full of form and confidence and vanity,
and disparages everything and everybody’s skill but his own. The
truth is,everybody says he is very able; but to hear how he laughs at
all the King’s music here, as Blagrave and others, that they cannot
keep time nor tune nor understand anything, and that Grebus the
Frenchman, the King’s Master of the Musique, how he understands
nothing nor can play on any instrument and so cannot compose,
and that he will give hima lift out of his place, and that he and the
King are mighty great, and that he hath already spoke to the King of
Grebus, would make a man piss. I had a good dinner for them, as a
venison pasty and some fowl, and after dinner we did play, he on
the Theorbo, Mr. Czsar on his French lute, and I on the viol, but
made but mean music; nor do I see that this Frenchman doth so
much wonders on the Theorbo, but without question he is a good
musician; but his vanity doth offend me. They gone towards night,
I to the office awhile, and then home and to my chamber, where
busy; till by and by comes Mr. Moore, and he stayed and supped
and talked with me about many things. By and by I got him to read
part of my Lord Cooke’s chapter of Treason, which is mighty well
worth reading and doth inform me in many things; and for aught I
see, it is useful now to know what these crimes are. And then to
supper; and after supper he went away, and soI got the girl to comb
my head and then to bed — my eyes bad.