1667-02-24

Lords day. Up, and with W. Batten by coach; he set me down
at my Lord Brouncker’s; and I with my Lord, by and by when
ready, to Whitehall. And by and by up to the Duke of York and
there presented our great letter and other papers; and among the
rest, my report of the victualling, which is good I think, and will
continue my pretence to the place, which I am still afeared Sir W.
Coventry’s imployment may extinguish. We have discharged
ourselfs in this letter fully from blame in the bad success of the Navy
ifmoney do not come soon to us—and so my heart is at pretty good
rest in this point. Having done here, Sir W. Batten and I home by
coach; and though the sermon at our church was begun, yet he
would light and go home and eata slice of roast beef off of the spit,
and did; and then he and I to church in the middle of the sermon.
After sermon home and alone with my wife dined. In the afternoon
away to Whitehall by water, and took a turn or two in the park and
then back to Whitehall; and there meeting my Lord Arlington, he,
by Iknow not what kindness, offered to carry me along with him to
my Lord Treasurer’s, whither I told him I was going. I believe he
had a mind to discourse of some Navy business; but Sir Tho.
Clifford coming into the coach to us, we were prevented; which I
was sorry for, for | had a mind to begin an acquaintance with him.
He speaks well and hath pretty slight superficial parts, I believe. He
in our going talked much of the plain habit of the Spaniards; how
the King and lords themselfs wear but a cloak of Colchester bayze,
and the ladies mantles, in cold weather, of white flannel. And that
the endeavours frequently of setting up the manufacture of making
these stuffs there have only been prevented by the Inquisition — the
English and Duchmen that have been sent for to work being taken
with a Psalm-book or Testament, and so clapped up and the house
pulled down by the Inquisitors, and the greatest lord in Spain dare
not say a word against it — if the word “Inquisition” be but
mentioned. At my Lord Treasurers light and parted with them,
they going into Council, and I walked with Capt. Cocke, who did
tell me that the Duch are in very great straits, so as to be said to be
not able to set out their fleet this year.
By and by comes Sir Robt. Viner and Lord Mayor to ask the
King’s direction about measuring out the streets according to the
new Act for building of the City, wherein the King is to be pleased.
730
But he says that the way proposed in Parliament by Coll. Birch
would have been the best, to have chosen some persons in trust and
sold the whole ground, and let it be sold again by them with
preference to the old owner; which would have certainly caused the
City to be built where these trustees pleased; whereas now, great
differences will be and the streets built by fits, and not entire till all
differences be decided. This, as he tells it, I think would have been
the best way. I enquired about the Frenchman! that was said to fire
the City, and was hanged for it by his own confession that he was
hired for it by a Frenchman of Roane, and that he did witha stick
reach in a Fireball in at a window of the house— whereas the maister
of the house, who is the King’s Baker, and his son and daughter do
all swear there was no such window —and that the fire did not begin
thereabouts. Asking Sir R. Viner what he thought was the cause of
the fire, he tells me that the Baker, son and his daughter did all
swear again and again that their Oven was drawn by 10 a-clock at
night. That having occasion to light a candle about 12, there was
not so much fire in the bakehouse as to light a match for a candle, so
as they were fain to go into another place to light it. That about 2 in
the morning they felt themselfs almost choked with smoke; and
rising, did find the fire coming upstairs — so they rose to save
themselfs; but that at that time the bavins were not on fire in the
yard. So that they are, as they swear, in absolute ignorance how this
fire should come — which isa strange thing, that so horrid an effect
should have so mean and uncertain a beginning. By and by called in
to the King and Cabinet and there had a few insipid words about
money for Tanger, but to no purpose. Thence away, walked to my
boat at Whitehall, and so home and to supper; and so to my Journall
and to bed.
This night, going through bridge by water, my waterman told
me how the mistress of the Beare tavern at the bridge foot did
lately fling herself into the Thames and drownded herself; which
did trouble me the more when they tell me it was she that did live
at the White Horse tavern in Lumbard street; which was a most
beautiful woman, as most I have seen. It seems hath had long
melancholy upon her, and hath endeavoured to make away with
herself often.