1667-02-30

Fast dayfor the King’s death. | all the morning at my chamber,
making up my month’s accounts; which I did before dinner to my
thorough content, and find myself but a small gainer this month,
having no manner ofprofits but just my salary. But blessed be God
that Iam able to save out of
that, living as Ido. So to dinner. Then to
my chamber all the afternoon; and in the evening my wife and I and
Mercer and Barker to little Michells, walked, with some neats’
tongues and cake and wine; and there sat with the little Couple with
great pleasure, and talked and eat and drank and saw their little
house, which is very pretty — and I much pleased therewith; and so
walked home about 8 at night, it being a little Mooneshine and fair
weather; and so into the garden and with Mercer sang till my wife
put me in mindofits being a fast day, and so I was sorry for it and
719
1667 30 January—5 February
stopped; and home to Cards a while, and had opportunity para
besar Mercer several times, and so to bed.
~+FEBRUARY-
1. Up, and to the office, where I was all the morning doing
business. At noon home to dinner; and after dinner down by water,
though it was a thick misty and raining day, and walked to
Deptford from Redriffe and there to Bagwells by appointment —
where the moher erat within expecting mi venida. And did sensa
alguna difficulty monter los degres and lie, comme jo desired it,
upon lo lectum; and there I did la cosa con much voluptas. By and
by su marido came in, and there, without any notice taken by him,
we discoursed of our business of getting him the new ship building
by Mr. Deane, which I shall do for him.
2. Up, and to the office. This day Ihear that Prince Rupert is to be
trepanned — God give good issue to it. Sir W. Penn looks upon me
and I on him, and speak about business together at the table well
enough, but no friendship or intimacy, nor do I desire to have any.
At noon dined well, and my brother and I to write over once more
with my own hand my Catalogue of books, while he reads to me.
After something of that done, and dined, I to the office, where all
the afternoon till night busy. At night, having done all my office
matters, [home, and my brother and Ito go on with my Catalogue,
and so to supper. This night comes home my new Silver Snuffe dish
which I do give myself for my closet; which is all I purpose to
bestow in plate of myself or shall need many a day, ifIcan keep
what I have. So to bed. I am very well pleased this night with
reading a poem I brought home with me last night from West-
minster hall, of Driden’s upon the present war —a very good poem.
5. This morning, before I went to the office there came to me Mr.
Young and Whistler, Flaggmakers, and with mighty earnestness
did present me with and press me to take a box, wherein I could not
guess there was less then rool in gold. But I do wholly refuse it, and
did not at last take it — the truth is, not thinking them safe men to
receive such a gratuity from nor knowing any considerable
courtesy that ever I did do them — but desirous to keep myself free
720
from their reports and to have it in my power to say I had refused
their offer.