1667-12-30

Up before day and by coach to Westminster; and there first to
Sir H. Cholmly, and there I did to my great content deliver him up
his little several papers for sums of money paid him, and took his
regular receipts upon his orders, wherein I am safe. Thence to
Whitehall and there to visit Sir G. Carteret, and there was with him
a great while and my Lady and they seem in very good humour; but
by and by Sir G. Carteret and I all alone, and there we did talk of the
ruinous condition we are in. That the Duke of Buckingham doth
rule all now; and the Duke of York comes endeed to the Caball but
signifies little there. That this new faction doth not endure, nor the
King, Sir W. Coventry; but yet that he is so usefull that they cannot
be without him, but that he is not now called to the Caball. That my
Lord of Buckingham, Bristoll, and Arlington do seem to agree in
these things; but that they do not in their hearts trust one another,
but do drive several ways, all of them. In short, he doth bless
himself that he is no more concerned in matters now and the hopes
he hath of being at liberty, when his accounts are over, to retire into
the country. That he doth give over the Kingdom for wholly lost.
So after some other little discourse, I away; and meeting Mr.
Cooling, I with him by coach to the Wardrobe, where I never was
since the Fire, in Hatton garden, but did not light; and he tells me he
fears that my Lord Sandwich will suffer much by Mr. Townsends’
being untrue to him, he being now unable to give the Commis-
sioners of the Treasury an account of his money received, by many
thousands of pounds — which I am troubled for. This day Idid carry
money out and paid several debts; among others, my tailor, and
shoemaker, and draper, Sir W. Turner, who begun to talk of the
commission of accounts, wherein he is one; but though they are the
greatest people that ever were in the nation as to power, and like to
be our judges, yet I did never speak one word to him of desiring
favour or bidding him joy in it; but did answer him to what he said,
and do resolve to stand and fall by my silent preparing to answer
857
whatever can be laid to me; and that will be my best proceeding I
think. This day I gota
little rent in my new fine Camlett cloak with
the latch of Sir G. Carteret’s door; but it is darned up at my tailor’s,
that it will be no great blemish to it; but it troubled me.