1667-05-05

Lords day. Up; and going down to the waterside, I met Sir Jo.
Robinson, and so with him by coach to Whitehall — still a vain,
prating, boasting man as ever I know, as if the whole City and
Kingdom had all its work done by him. He tells me he hath now got
a street ordered to be continued, 40 feet broad, from Paul’s through
Cannon street to the Tower, which will be very fine. He, and others
this day where I was in the afternoon, doth tell me of at least six or
eight fires within these few days, and continually stories of fires;
and real fires there have been in one place or other almost ever since
the late great fire, as ifthere was a fate over people for fire. I walked
over the park to Sir W. Coventry; among other things, to tell him
what I hear of people’s being forced to sell their bills before
September for 35 and 40 per cent loss; and which is worst, that there
are some Courtiers that have made a knot to buy them, in hopes of
some ways to get money of the King to pay them — which Sir W.
Coventry is amazed at, and says we are a people made up for
destruction; and will do what he can to prevent all this, by getting
the King to provide wherewith to pay them. We talked of Tanger,
of which he is ashamed; also that it should put the King to this
charge for no good in the world, and now a man going over that is a
766
good Souldier but a debauched man, 'which that place needs not to
have. And so used these words: “That this place was to the King as
my Lord Carnarvan says of Wood; that it is an Excrescence of the
earth provided by God for the payment of debts.”’ Thence away to
Sir G. Carteret, whom I find taking physic; I stayed talking with
him buta little, and so home to church and heard a dull sermon; and
most of the best women of our parish gone into the country, or at
least not at church. So home and find my boy not there, nor was at
church; which vexed me, and when he came home | enquired; he
tells me he went to see his mother; I sent him back to her to send me
some token that he was with her; so there came a man with him
back of good fashion; he says he saw him with her; which pacified
me, but I did soundly threaten him before him. And so to dinner,
and then hadalittle scolding with my wife for not being fine
enough to go to the christening today; which she excused by being
ill, as she was endeed, and cried; but I was in an ill humour, and
ashamed endeed that she should not go dressed. However, friends
by and by, and we went by water to Michell’s; and there his little
house full of his father and mothers and the kindred, hardly any
else, and mighty merry in this innocent company; and Betty
mighty pretty in bed, but her head akeing, not very merry; but the
company mighty merry, and I with them; and so the child was
christened, my wife, his father, and her mother the witnesses, and
the child’s name Elizabeth. So we had gloves and wine and wafers,
very pretty, and talked and tattled; and so we away by water and up
with the tide, she and I and Barker, as high as Barne Elmes, it being
a fine evening; and back again to pass the bridge at standing-water
between 9 and 10 at night; and then home and to supper, and then to
bed with much pleasure. This day Sir W. Coventry tells me the
Dutch fleet hath shot some shot, 4 or 500, into Burnt Iland in the
Frith, but without any hurt; and so are gone.