1667-07-14

Lords day. Up, and my wife, a little before 4, and to make us
ready; and by and by Mrs. Turner came to us by agreement, and she
and I stayed talking below while my wife dressed herself; which
vexed me that she was so long about it, keeping us till past 5 a-clock
before she was ready. She ready, and taking some bottles of wine
and beer and some cold Fowle with us into the Coach, we took
coach and four horses which I had provided last night, and so away
— a very fine day; and so towards Epsum, talking all the way
pleasantly. The country very fine; only, the way very dusty. We
got to Epsum by 8 a-clock to the Well, where much company; and
there we light and I drank the water; they did not, but do go about
and walk a little among the women, but I did drink four pints and
had some very good stools by it. Here I met with divers of our
town; among others, with several of the tradesmen of our office,
but did talk but little with them, it growing hot in the sun; and so
we took coach again and to the Towne to the King’s Head, where
our coachman carried us; and there had an ill room for us to go into,
but the best in the house that was not taken up; here we called for
drink and bespoke dinner. And hear that my Lord Buckhurst and
Nelly is lodged at the next house, and Sir Ch. Sidly with them, and
keep a merry house. Poor girl, I pity her; but more the lossof her at
the King’s House. W. Hewers rode with us, andI left him and the
women, and myself walked to church, where few people (contrary
to what I expected) and none I knew but all the Houblons brothers;
and them after sermon I did salute and walk with towards my Inne,
which was in their way to their lodgings. They came last night to
see their elder brother, who stays here at the waters, and away
tomorrow. James did tell me that I was the only happy man of the
Navy; of whom, he says, during all this freedom the people have
taken of speaking treason, he hath not heard one bad word of me-
which is a great joy to me, for I hear the same of others; but do
know that Ihave deserved as well as most. We parted, to meet anon;
and I to my women into a better room, which the people of the
807
1667 14 July
house borrowed for us; and there to dinner, a good dinner, and
were merry; and Pendleton came to us, who happened to be in the
house, and there talked and were merry.
After dinner, he gone, we all lay down after dinner (the day being
wonderful hot) to sleep, and each of us took a good nap and then
rose; and Tom Willson came to see me and sat and talked an hour,
and I perceive he hath been much acquainted with Dr. Fuller (Tom)
and Dr. Pierson and several of the great Cavalier parsons during the
late troubles; and I was glad to hear him talk of them, which he did
very ingeniously, and very much of Dr. Fullers art of memory,
which he did tell me several instances of. By and by he parted, and
we took coach and to take the ayre, there beinga fine breeze abroad;
and I went and carried them to the Well and there filled some bottles
of water to carry home with me. Here W. Hewer’s horse broke
loose, and we had the sport to see him taken again. ThenI carried
them to see my Cosen Pepys’s house; and light and walked round
about it, and they like it (as endeed it deserves) very well, and is a
pretty place; and then I walked them to the wood hard by and there
got them in in the thickets, till they had lost themselfs and I could
not find the way into any of the walks in the wood, which endeed
are very pleasant if I could have found them. At last got out of the
wood again; and I, by leaping down the little bank coming out of
the wood, did sprain my right foot, which brought me great
present pain; but presently, with walking, it went away for the
present, and so the women and W. Hewer and I walked upon the
Downes, where a flock of sheep was, and the most pleasant and
innocent sight that ever Isaw in my life; we find a shepheard and his
little boy reading, far from any houses or sight of people, the Bible
to him. So I made the boy read to me, which he did with the forced
Tone that children do usually read, that was mighty pretty; and
then I did give him something and went to the father and talked
with him; andI find he had been a servant in my Cosen Pepys’s
house, and told me what was become of their old servants. He did
content himself mightily in my liking his boy’s reading and did
bless God for him, the most like one of the old Patriarchs that ever I
saw in my life, and it brought those thoughts of the old age of the
world in my mind for two or three days after. We took notice of his
woolen knit stockings of two colours mixed, and of his shoes shod
with Iron shoes, both at the toe and heels, and with great nails in the
soles of his feet, which was mighty pretty; and taking notice of
them, “Why,” says the poor man, “‘the Downes, yousee, are full of
808
stones, and we are fain to shoe ourselfs thus; and these,” says he,
“will make the stones fly till they sing before me.” I did give the
poor man something, for which he was mighty thankful, and Itried
to cast stones with his Horne Crooke. He values his dog mightily,
that would turn a sheep any way which he would have him when he
goes to fold them. Told me there was about 18 Scoare sheep in his
flock, and that he hath 4s. a week the year round for keeping of
them. So we parted thence, with mighty pleasure in the discourse
we had with this poor man; and Mrs. Turner, in the common fields
here, did gather one of the prettiest nosegays that ever I saw in my
life.
So to our coach, and through Mr. Minnes’s wood and looked
upon Mr. Eveling’s house; and so over the common and through
Epsum towne to our Inne, in the way stopping a poor woman with
her milk-pail and in one of my gilt Tumblers did drink our bellyfuls
of milk, better then any Creame; and so to our Inne and there had a
dish of creame, but it was sour and so had no pleasure in it; and so
paid our reckoning and took coach, it being about 7 at night, and
passed and saw the people walking with their wifes and children to
take the ayre; and we set out for home, the sun by and by going
down, and we in the cool of the evening all the way with much
pleasure home, talking and pleasing ourselfs with the pleasure of
this day’s work; and Mrs. Turner mightily pleased with my
resolution, which tell her is never to keep a country-house, but to
keep a coach and with my wife on the Saturday to go sometimes for
a day to this place and then quite to another place; and there is more
variety, and as little charge and no trouble, as there is in a country-
house. Anon it grew dark, and as it grew dark we had pleasure to
see several Glow wormes, which was mighty pretty. But my foot
begins more and more to pain me; which Mrs. Turner, by keeping
her warm hand upon it, did much ease; but so that when we came
home, which was just at 11 at night, Iwas not able to walk from the
lane’s end to my house without being helped, which did trouble
me; and therefore to bed presently; but thanks be to God, found that
I had not been missed nor any business happened in my absence; so
to bed and there had a cere-cloth laid to my foot; and lay alone, but
in great pain all night long.