1667-12-24

Up, and all the morning at the office; and at noon with my
clerks to dinner and then to the office again, busy at the office till 6 at
night; and then by coach to St. James’s, it being now about 6 at
night, my design being to see the Ceremonys, this night being the
Eve of Christmas, at the Queen’s Chapel, But it being not begun, I
to Westminster hall and there stayed and walked; and then to the
1. Clarendon’s impeachment.
2. Her former suitor, Robert Ensum (d. 1666).
855
Swan and there drank and talked, and did besar a little Frank; and so
to Whitehall and sent my coach round, and I through the park to
chapel, where I got in up almost to the rail and with a great deal of
patience, stayed from 9 at night to 2 in the morning in a very great
Crowd; and there expected, but found nothing extraordinary, there
being nothing but a high Masse. The Queen was there and some
ladies. But Lord, what an odde thing it was for me to be in a crowd
of people, here a footman, there a beggar, here a fine lady, there a
zealous poor papist, and here a Protestant, two or three together,
come to see the show. I was afeared of my pocket being picked very
much. Their music very good endeed, but their service Iconfess too
frivolous, that there can be no zeal go along with it; and I do find by
them themselfs, that they do run over their beads with one hand,
and point and play and talk and make signs with the other, in the
midst of their Messe. But all things very rich and beautiful. And I
see the papists had the wit, most of them, to bring cushions to kneel
on; which I wanted, and was mightily troubled to kneel. All being
done, and I sorry for my coming, missing of what I expected;
which was to have had a child borne and dressed there and a great
deal of do, but we broke up and nothing like it done; and thereI left
people receiving the sacrament, and the Queen gone, and ladies;
only my [Lady] Castlemayne, who looks prettily in her night-
clothes. And so took my coach, which waited, and away through
Covent garden to set down two gentlemen and a lady, who came
thither to see also and did make mighty mirth in their talk of the
folly of this religion; and so I stopped, having set them down, and
drank some burnt wine at the Rose tavern door, while the
constables came and two or three Bell-men went by, it being a fine
light moonshine morning; and so home round the City and stopped
and dropped money at five or six places, which I was the willinger
to do, it being Christmas day; and so home and there find wife in
bed, and Jane and the maids making pyes, and so I to bed and slept
well.