1667-06-13

Nosooner up but hear the sad news confirmed, of the Royall
Charles being taken by them and now in fitting by them (which Pett
should have carried up higher by our several orders, and deserves
therefore to be hanged for not doing it) and burning several others,
and that another fleet is come up into the Hope; upon which news
the King and Duke of York have been below since 4 a-clock in the
morning, to command the sinking of ships at Barking Creeke and
other places, to stop their coming up higher; which put me into
such fear that I presently resolved of my father’s and wife’s going
into the country; and at two hours’ warning they did go by the
coach this day — with about 1300/ in gold in their night-bag; pray
God give them good passage and good care to hide it when they
come home, but my heart is full of fear. They gone, I continued in
frights and fear what to do with the rest. W. Hewer hath been at the
banquiers and hath got s5ool out of Backewell’s hands of his own
money; but they are so called upon that they will be all broke,
hundreds coming to them for money — and their answer is, “‘It is
payable at twenty days; when the days are out, we will pay you;”
and those that are not so, they make tell over their money, and
make their bags false on purpose to give cause to retell it and so
spend time; I cannot have my 200 pieces of gold again for silver, all
being bought up last night that were to be had —and sold for 24 and
25s. a-piece. So I must keep the silver by me, which sometimes I
think to fling into the house of office — and then again, know not
how I shall come by it if we be made to leave the office. Every
minute some[one] or other calls for this order or that order; and so I
forced to be at the office most of the day about the fireships which
are to be suddenly fitted out; and it’s a most strange thing that we
hear nothing from any of my Brethren at Chatham; so that we are
wholly in the dark, various being the reports of what is done there—
788
13 June 1667
insomuch, that I sent Mr. Clapham express thither to see how
matters go. I did about noon resolve to send Mr. Gibson away after
my wife with another 1000 pieces, under colour of an express to Sir
Jer. Smith, who is, as Ihear, with some ships at Newcastle; which |
did really send to him, and may possibly prove of good use to the
King; for it is possible, in the hurry of business that they may not
think of it at Court, and the charge of express is not considerable to
the King. So though I entend Gibson no further then to Hunt-
ington, yet I direct him to send the packet forward.
My business the most of the afternoon is listening to everybody
that comes to the office, what news, which is variously related,
some better, some worse, but nothing certain. The King and Duke
of York up and down all the day here and there; some time on
Tower hill, where the City Militia was; where the King did make a
speech to them that they should venture themselfs no further then
he would himself. I also sent (my mind being in pain) Saunders after
my wife and father, to overtake them at their night’s lodging to see
how matters go with them. In the evening I sent for my cousin
Sarah and her husband; who came and I did deliver them my chest
of writings about Brampton, and my brother Tom’s papers and my
Journalls, which I value much — and did send my two silver flagons
to Kate Joyce’s: that so, being scattered what I have, something
might be saved. I have also made a girdle, by which with some
trouble I do carry about me 300! in gold about my body, that I may
not be without something in case I should be surprized; for I think,
_ in any nation but ours, people that appear (for we are not endeed so)
so faulty as we would have their throats cut. In the evening comes
Mr. Pelling and several others to the office, and tell me that never
were people so dejected as they are in the City all over at this day,
and do talk most loudly, even treason; as, that we are bought and
sold, that we are betrayed by the papists and others about the King —
cry out that the Office of the Ordinance hath been so backward as
no powder to have been at Chatham nor Upner Castle till such a
time, and the carriages all broken — that Legg is a papist — that
Upner, the old good castle built by Queen Elizabeth, should be
lately slighted — that the ships at Chatham should not be carried up
higher. They look upon us as lost; and remove their families and
rich goods in the City and do think verily that the French, being
come down with his army to Dunkirke, it is to invade us — and that
we shall be invaded. Mr. Clerke the solicitor comes to me about
business, and tells me that he hears that the King hath chosen Mr.
789
Pierpoint and Vaughan of the West privy councillors — that my
Lord Chancellor was affronted in the Hall this day by people telling
him of his Dunkirke house — and that there are Regiments ordered
to be got together, whereof to be commanders my Lord Fairfax,
Ingolsby, Bethell, Norton, and Birch and other presbyterians; and
that Dr. Bates will have liberty to preach. Now whether this be true
or not, I know not; but do think that nothing but this will unite us
together. Late at night comes Mr. Hudson the cooper, my
neighbour, and tells me that he came from Chatham this evening at
5 a-clock and saw this afternoon the Royall James, Oake, and London
burnt by the enemy with their fireships; that two or three men-of-
war came up with them, and made no more of Upner castle’s
shooting then of a fly — that these ships lay below Upner Castle (but
therein I conceive he is in an error) — that the Dutch are fitting out
the Royall Charles — that we shot so far as from the yard thither, so
that the shot did no good, for the bullets grazed on the water — that
Upner played hard with their guns at first, but slowly afterward,
either from the men being beat off or their powder spent. But we
hear that the fleet in the Hope is not come up any higher the last
flood. And Sir W. Batten tells me that ships are provided to sink in
the River about Woolwich, that will prevent their coming up
higher if they should attempt it. I made my will also this day, and
did give all I had equally between my father and wife — and left
copiesofit in each of Mr. Hater and W. Hewer’s hands, who both
witnessed the will; and so to supper and then to bed; and slept pretty
well, but yet often waking.