1668-01-31

Thus ends the year, with great happiness to myself and family
as to health and good condition in the world, blessed be God for it;
only, with great trouble to my mind in reference to the public, there
being little hopes left but that the whole nation must in a very little
time be lost, either by troubles at home, the Parliament being
dissatisfied and the King led into unsettled counsels by some about
him, himself considering little—and divisions growing between the
King and Duke of York; or else by foreign invasion, to which we
must submit, if any at this bad point of time should come upon us;
which the King of France is well able to do. These thoughts, and
some cares upon me concerning my standing in this office when the
committee of Parliament shall come to examine our Navy matters,
which they will now shortly do. I pray God they may do the
Kingdom service therein, as they will have sufficient opportunity
of doing it.
858
RN
fsa}
hed?
y
—% JANUARY?-
1. Up, and all the morning in my chamber making up some
accounts against this beginning of the new year; and so about noon
abroad with my wife, who was to dine with W. Hewer and Willet at
Mrs. Pierce’s; but I had no mind to be with them, for I do clearly
find that my wife is troubled at my friendship with her and Knepp,
and so dined with my Lord Crew, with whom was Mr. Browne,
Clerk of the House of Lords, and Mr. John Crew. Here was mighty
good discourse, as there is alway; and among other things, my Lord
Crew did turn to a place in the Life ofSir Ph. Sidny, wrote by Sir
Fulke Grevill, which doth foretell the present condition of this
nation in relation to the Dutch, to the very degree of a prophecy;
and is so remarkable that I am resolved to buy one of them, it being
quite through a good discourse. Thence I after dinner to the Duke
of York’s playhouse, and there saw Sir Martin Marrall, which I have
seen so often; and yet am mightily pleased with it and think it
mighty witty, and the fullest of proper matter for mirth that ever
was writ. AndI do clearly see that they do improve in their acting of
it. Here a mighty company of citizens, prentices and others; and it
makes me observe that when Ibegin first to be able to bestow a play
on myself, I do not remember that I saw so many by half of the
ordinary prentices and mean people in the pit, at 2s.-6d. apiece, as
now; I going for several years no higher then the 12d., and then the
18d. places, and thoughI
strained hard to go in then when I did—so
much the vanity and prodigality of the age is to be observed in this
perticular. Thence I to Whitehall, and there walked up and down
the House a while.
By and byI met with Mr. Brisban; and having it in my mind this
Christmas to (do what Inever can remember that Idid) go to see the
manner of the gaming at the Groome porter’s (I having in my
coming from the playhouse stepped into the two Temple halls, and
there saw the dirty prentices and idle people playing — wherein Iwas
mistaken in thinking to have seen gentlemen of quality playing
859
1668 1 January
there, as I think it was when I was alittle child, that one of my
father’s servants, John Bassum I think, carried me in his armes
thither), I did tell him of it and he did lead me thither; where after
staying an hour, they begin to play at about 8 at night — where to see
how differently one man took his losing from another, one cursing
and swearing, and another only muttering and grumbling to
himself, a third without any appearing discontent at all—to see how
the dice will run good luck in one hand for half an hour together —
and another have no good luck at all. To see how easily here, where
they play nothing but guinnys, 100l is won or lost. To see two or
three gentlemen come in there drunk, and putting their stock of
gold together — one 22 pieces, the second 4, and the third ¢§pieces;
and these to play one with another, and forget how much each of
them brought, but he that brought the 22 think that he brought no
more then the rest. To see the different humours of gamesters to
change their luck when it is bad — how ceremonious they are as to
call for new dice — to shift their places — to alter their manner of
throwing; and that with great industry, as if there was anything in
it. To see how some gamesters, that have no money now to spend
as formerly, do come and sit and look on; as among others, Sir
Lewes Dives, who was here and hath been a great gamester in his
time. To hear their cursing and damning to no purpose; as one man,
being to throwa seven if he could and failing to do it after a great
many throws, cried he would be damned if ever he flung seven
more while he lived, his despair of throwing it being so great, while
others did it as their luck served, almost every throw. To see how
persons of the best quality do here sit down and play with people of
any, though meaner; and to see how people in ordinary clothes shall
come hither and play away 100, or 2 or 300 guinnys, without any
kind of difficulty. And lastly, to see the formality of the Groome
porter, who is their judge of all disputes in play and all quarrels that
may arise therein; and how his under-officers are there to observe
true play at each table and to give new dice, is a consideration I
never could have thought had been in the world, had Inot now seen
it. And mighty glad I am that I did see it; and it may be will find
another evening, before Christmas be over, to see it again; when I
may stay later, for their heat of play begins not till about 11 or 12 a-
clock; which did give me another pretty observation, of a man that
did win mighty fast when I was there: I think he won rool at single
pieces ina
little time; while all the rest envied him his good fortune,
he cursed it, saying, “A pox on it that it should come so earely upon
860
me! For this fortune two hours hence would be worth something to
me; but then, God damn me, I shall have no such luck.”’ This kind
of profane, mad entertainment they give themselfs. And so Ihaving
enough for once, refusing to venture, though Brisband pressed me
hard and tempted me with saying that no man was ever known to
lose the first time, the Devil being too cunning to discourage a
gamester; and he offered me also to lend me ten pieces to venture,
but I did refuse and so went away — and took coach and home about
9 or 10 at night.