1668-03-06

Up betimes, and with Sir D. Gawden to Sir W. Coventry’s
chamber, where the first word he said to me was, ‘“Goodmorrow
Mr. Pepys, that must be Speaker of the Parliament-house”’ — and
did protest I had got honour for ever in Parliament. He said that his
brother, that sat by him, admires me; and another gentleman said
that I could not get less than 1000! a year if I would put on a gown
and plead at the Chancery bar. But what pleases me most, he tells
me that the Sollicitor generall did protest that he thought Ispoke the
best of any man in England. After several talks with him alone
885
touching his own businesses, he carried me to Whitehall and there
parted; and I to the Duke of York’s lodging and find him going to
the parke, it being a very fine morning; and I after him, and as soon
as he saw me, he told me with great satisfaction that Ihad converted
a great many yesterday, and did with great praise of me go on with
the discourse with me. And by and by overtaking the King, the
King and Duke of York came to me both, and he said, “Mr. Pepys,
Tam very glad of your success yesterday;”’ and fell to talk of my well
speaking; and many of the Lords there, my Lord Berkely did cry me
up for what they had heard of it; and others, Parliament[-men] there
about the King, did say that they never heard sucha speech in their
lives delivered in that manner. Progers of the Bedchamber swore to
me afterward before Brouncker in the afternoon, that he did tell the
King that he thought I might teach the Sollicitor generall.
Everybody that saw me almost came to me, as Joseph Williamson
and others, with such eulogy as cannot be expressed. From thence I
went to Westminster hall, where I met Mr. G. Mountagu; who
came to me and kissed me, and told me that he had often heretofore
kissed my hands, but now he would kiss my lips, protesting that I
was another Cicero, and said all the world said the same of me. Mr.
Ashburnham, and every creature I met there of the Parliament or
that knew anything of the Parliament’s actings, did salute me with
this honour — Mr. Godolphin, Mr. Sands, who swore he would go
twenty mile at any time to hear the like again, and that he never saw
so many sit four hours together to hear any man in his life as there
did to hear me. Mr. Chichly, Sir
J.Duncom, and everybody doth
say that the Kingdom will ring of my ability, and that I have done
myself right for my whole life; and so Capt. Cocke, and other of
my friends, say that no man had ever such opportunity of making
his abilities known. And, that I may cite all at once, Mr. Lieutenant
of the Tower did tell me that Mr. Vaughan did protest to him, and
that in his hearing it, said so to the Duke of Albemarle and
afterward to W. Coventry, that he had sat 26 years in Parliament
and never heard such a speech there before — for which the Lord
God make me thankful, and that I may make use of it not to pride
and vainglory, but that now I have this esteem, I may do nothing
that may lessen it.