1668-06-17

Wedn. Rose, and paying the reckoning, 12s. 6d.; servants and
poor, 2s.6d.; music, the worst we have had, coming to our
chamber-door, but calling us by wrong names, we gave him
nothing. So set out with one coach in company, and through
Mydenhead, which I never saw before, to Colebrooke by noon; the
way mighty good; and there dined, and fitted ourselvesa little to go
through London anon. Somewhat out of humour all day, reflecting
on my wife’s neglect of things and impertinent humour got by this
liberty of being from me, which she is never to be trusted with; for
she is a fool. Thence pleasant way to London, before night, and find
all very well, to great content; and there to talk with my wife, and
saw Sr. W. P[enn], who is well again. Hear of the ill news by the
great fire at Berbedos. By and by home, and there with my people
to supper, ail in pretty good humour, though I find my wife hath
something in her gizzard, that only waits an opportunity of being
provoked to bring up; but Iwill not, for my content sake, give it. So
I to bed, glad to find all so well here, and slept well.
18-19. Up betimes and to the office, there to set my papers in
order and books, my office having been new-whited and windows
928
made clean. And so to sit, where all the morning; and did receive a
hint or two from my Lord Anglesy, as if he thought much of my
taking the ayre as I have done — but I care not a turd. But whatever
the matter is, I think he hath some ill-will to me, or at least an
opinion that lam more the servant of the Board then] am. At noon
home to dinner, where my wife still ina melancholy fusty humour,
and crying; and doth not tell me plainly what it is, but I by little
words find that she hath heard of my going to plays and carrying
people abroad every day in her absence; and that I cannot help, but
the storm will break out, I know, ina little time. After dinner,
carried her by coach to St. James’s, where she sat in the coach till Ito
“my Lady Peterborough; who tells me, among other things, her
Lord’s good words to the Duke of York lately about my Lord
Sandwich, and that the Duke of York is kind to my Lord Sandwich
— which I am glad to hear. My business here was about her Lord’s
pension from Tanger. Here met with Povy, who tells me how hard
Creed is upon him, though he did give him, about six months since
I think he said, 50 pieces in gold. And one thing there is in his
accounts that I fear may touch me; but I shall help it, [hope. So, my
wife not speaking a word going nor coming, nor willing to go toa
play, though a new one, I to the office and did much business. At
night home, where supped Mr. Turner and his wife, and Betty and
Mercer and Pelling, as merry as the ill melancholy humour that my
wife was in would let us; which vexed me, but Itook no notice ofit,
thinking that will be the best way, and let it wear away itself.
After supper, parted and to bed; and my wife troubled all night,
and about one a-clock goes out of the bed to the girl’s bed; which
did trouble me, she crying and sobbing, without telling the cause.
By and by comes back to me, and still crying; Ithen rose and would
have sat up all night, but she would have me come to bed again.
And being pretty well pacified, we to sleep; when between 2 and 3
in the morning, we were waked with my maids crying out, “‘Fire!
Fire! in Marke lane!”’ so I rose and looked out, and it was dreadful;
and strange apprehensions in me, and us all, of being presently
burnt: so we all rose, and my care presently was to secure my gold
and plate and papers, and could quickly have done it, but I went
forth to see where it was, and the whole town was presently in the
streets; and I found it in a new-built house that stood alone in
Minchin lane, over against the Clothworkers hall — which burned
furiously, the house not yet quite finished. And the benefit of brick
was well seen, for it burnt all inward and fell down within itself—so
929
no fear of doing more hurt; so homeward and stopped at Mr. Mills,
where he and she at the door, and Mrs. Turner and Betty and Mrs.
Hollworthy; and there I stayed and talked, and up to the church
leads and saw the fire, which spent and spent itself, till all fear over; I
home, and there we to bed again and slept pretty well. And about 9
rose; and then my wife fell into her blubbering again and at length
had a request to make to me, which was that she might go into
France and live there out of trouble: and then all came out, that I
loved pleasure and denied her any, and a deal of do; andI find that
there have been great fallings-out between my father and her,
whom for ever hereafter I must keep asunder, for they cannot
possibly agree. AndI said nothing; but with very mild words and
few suffered her humour to spend, till we begin to be very quiet and
I think all will be over, and friends; and so I to the office, where all
the morning doing business. Yesterday Iheard how my Lord Ashly
is like to die, having some imposthume in his breast, that he hath
been fain to be cut into the body. At noon home to dinner; and
thence by coach to Whitehall, where we attended the Duke of York
in his closet upon our usual business. And thence out and did see
many of the Knights of the Guarter with the King and Duke of
York, going into the Privy-chamber to elect the Elector of Saxony
into the Order; who I did hear the Duke of York say was a good
drinker; I know not upon what score this compliment is done him.
Thence with W. Penn, who is in great pain of the gowte, by coach
round by Hoborn home, he being at every kennel full of pain.
There home; and by and by comes in my wife and Deb, who have
been at the King’s House today, thinking to spy me there; and saw
the new play, Evening Love (of Dryden’s); which though the world
commends, she likes not. So to supper and talk, and all in good
humour; and then to bed — where I slept not well, from my
apprehensions of some trouble about some business of Mr. Povy’s
he told me of the other day.