1668-05-25

Waked betimes, and lay long hazendo doz vezes con mi
moher con grando pleasure to me and ella; and there fell to talking,
and by and by rose, it being the first fair day, and yet not quite fair,
that we have had some time; and so up and to walk with my father
again in the garden, consulting what to do with him and this house
when Pall and her husband goes away; andI think it will be to let it
and he go live with her, though I am against letting the house for
any long time — because of having it to retire to ourselfs. Sol do |
entend to think more of it before I resolve. By and by comes Mr.
Cooke to see me, and so spent the morning; and he gone by and by,
at noon to dinner, where Mr. Sheply came and we merry, all being
in good humour between my wife and her people about her; and
after dinner took horse, I promising to fetch her away about
fourteen days hence. And so calling all of us, we men on horseback
and the women and my father, at Goody Gorum’s and there in a
frolic drinking, I took leave, there going with me and my boy, my
two brothers, and one Browne, whom they call in mirth ‘“‘Collo-
nell’’, for our guide, and also Mr. Sheply to the end of Huntington,
and another gentleman who accidentally came thither, one Mr.
Castle; and I made them drink at the Chequer, where I observed the
same Tapster, Tom, that was there when I was a little boy; and so at
the end of the town, took leave of Sheply and the other gentleman,
and so we away and got well to Cambridge about 7 to the Rose, the
waters not being now so high as before. And here lighting, I took
my boy and two brothers and walked to Magdalen College; and
there into the Butterys as a stranger and there drank my bellyfull of
their beer, which pleased meas the best Iever drank; and hear by the
butler’s man, who was son to Goody Mulliner over against the
College that we used to buy stewed prunes of, concerning the
College and persons in it; and find very few, only Mr. Hollins and
Peachell Ithink, that were of my time. But Iwas mightily pleased to
come in this condition to see and ask; and thence, giving the fellow
something, away; walked to Chesterton to see our old walk; and
917
there into the church, the bells ringing, and saw the place I used to
sit in; and so to the ferry, and ferried over to the other side and
walked with great pleasure, the river being mighty high by
Barnwell Abbey; and soby Jesus College to the town, and so to our
quarters and to supper; and then to bed, being very weary and
sleepy, and mightily pleased with this night’s walk.