1668-09-09

Up, and to the office; and thence to the Duke of Richmond’s
lodgings by his desire, by letter yesterday. I found him at his
lodgings in the little building in the Bouling-green at Whitehall,
that that was begun to be built by Capt. Rolt. They are fine rooms. I
did hope to see his Lady, the beautiful Mrs. Stuart; but she, Ihear, is
in the country. His business was about his Yacht, and seems a
mighty good-natured man, and did presently write me a warrant
for a Doe from Cobham when the season comes, bucks season
being past. Ishall make much of this acquaintance, that Imay live to
see his Lady near. Thence to Westminster to Sir R. Long’s office;
and going, met Mr. George Mountagu, who talked and compli-
mented me mightily; and long discourse I had with him — who, for
news, tells me for certain that Trevor doth come to be Secretary at
Michaelmas and that Morris goes out, and he believes without any
compensation. He tells me that now Buckingham does rule all; and
the other day, in the King’s Journy he is now in, at Bagshot and that
way, he caused Prince Rupert’s horses to be turned out of an Inne,
and caused his own to be kept there; which the Prince complained
of to the King, and the Duke of York seconded the complaint but
the King did over-rule it for Buckingham; by which there are high
displeasures among them — and Buckingham and Arlington rule all.
Thence by water home and to dinner; and after dinner by water
again to Whitehall, where Brouncker, W. Penn and I attended the
Commissioners of the Treasury about the victualling contract —
where high words between Sir Tho. Clifford and us, and myself
more perticularly, who told him that something that he said was
told him about this business was a flat untruth. However, we went
on to our business in the examination of the draft, and so parted,
and I vexed at what happened. And Brouncker, W. Penn and I
home ina hackney coach—and [all the night so vexed, that Idid not
sleep almost all night; which shows how unfit Iam for trouble. So
after a little supper, vexed and spendinga little time melancholy in
making a base to the Lark’s song, I to bed.