1668-02-11

At the office all the morning, where comes a damned
summons to attend the Committee of Miscarriges today; which
makes me mad that I should by my place become the hackney of
this Office, in perpetual trouble and vexation, that need it least. At
noon home to dinner, where little pleasure, my head being split
almost with the variety of troubles upon me at this time and cares.
And after dinner by coach to Westminster hall and sent my wife and
Deb to see Mustapha acted. Here I brought a book to the
Committee, and do find them, and perticularly Sir Tho. Clerges,
mighty hot in the business of tickets; which makes me mad, to see
them bite at the stone and not at the hand that flings it. And here my
Lord Bruncker unnecessarily orders it that he is called in, to give
opportunity to present his report of the state of that business of
paying by ticket; which Ido not think will do him any right, though
he was made believe that it did operate mightily, and that Sir Fresh.
Hollis did make a mighty harangue and to much purpose in his
defence; but I believe no such effects of it, for going in afterward I
did hear them speak with prejudice of it, and that his pleading of the
Admirall’s warrant for it now was only an evasion, if not an
aspersion upon the Admiral, and therefore they would not admit
of this his report, but go on with their report as they had resolved
before. The orders they sent for this day was the first order that I
have yet met with about this business, and was of my own single
hand warranting; but I do think it will do me no harm, and
therefore do not much trouble myself with it — more then to see
how much trouble I am brought to who have best deported myself
in all the King’s business. Thence with Lord Brouncker and set him
down at Bowstreete, and so to the Duke of York’s playhouse and
there saw the last Act for nothing; where I never saw such good
acting of any creature as Smith’s part of Zanger; and I do also,
though it was excellently acted by [blank], do yet want Betterton
mightily. Thence to the Temple to Porter’s chamber, where Cocke
met me; and after a stay there some time, they two and I to
Pemerton’s chamber and there did read over the act of calling
people to account and did discourse all our business of the prizes;
875
and upon the whole, he doth make it plainly appear that there is no
avoiding to give these Commissioners satisfaction in everything
they will ask; and that there is fear lest they may find reason to make
us refund for all the extraordinary profit made by those bargains;
and doth make me resolve rather to declare plainly and once for all
the truth of the whole and what my profit hath been, then be forced
at last to do it and in the meantime live in pain —as Imust always do.
And with this resolution on my part, I departed with some more
satisfaction of mind, though with less hopes of profit then I
expected. This morning, my wife in bed told me the story of our
Tom and Jane; how the rogue did first demand her consent to love
and marry him and then, with pretence of displeasing me, did slight
her; but both he and she have confessed the matter to her, and she
hath charged him to go on with his love to her and be true to her,
and so I think the business will go on; which, for my love to her
because she is in love with him, I am pleased with, but otherwise I
think she will have no good bargain of it; at least, if 1 should not do
well in my place. But if I do stand, I do entend to give her sol in
money and do them all the good I can in my way.