1668-11-04

Up, and by coach to Whitehall; and there I find the King and
Duke of York come the last night, and everybody’s mouth full of
my Lord Anglesy’s suspension being sealed; which it was, it seems,
yesterday; so that he is prevented in his remedy at the Council; and
it seems the two new Treasurers did kiss the King’s hand this
morning, brought in by my Lord Arlington. They walked up and
down together the Court this day, and several people joyed them.
But I avoided it, that I might not be seen to look either way. This
day also, I hear that my Lord Ormond is to be declared in Council
no more Deputy-Governor of Ireland, his commission being
955
1668 4 November
expired, and the King is prevailed with to take it out of his hands;
which people do mightily admire, saying that he is the greatest
subject of any prince in Christendome, and hath more acres of land
then any — and hath done more for his prince then ever any yet did.
But all will not do; he must down it seems — the Duke of
Buckingham carrying all before him. But that that troubles me
most, is that they begin to talk that the Duke of York’s regiment is
ordered to be disbanded; and more, that undoubtedly his Admir-
alcy will fallow; which doth shake me mightily, and I fear will have
ill consequences in the nation, for these counsels are very mad. The
Duke of York doth, by all men’s report, carry himself wonderful
submissive to the King, in the most humble manner in the world;
but yet it seems nothing must be spared that tends to the keeping
out of the Chancellor, and that is the reason of all this. The great
discourse now is that the Parliament shall be dissolved, and another
called which shall give the King the Deane and Chapters lands; and
that will put him out of debt. And it is said that Buckingham doth
knownly meet daily with Wildman and other Commonwealths-
men; and that when he is with them, he makes the King believe that
he is with his wenches. But that that pleases me most, isthat several
do tell me that Pen is to be removed; and others, that he hath
resigned his place; and perticularly, Spragge tells me for certain that
he hath resigned it and is become a partener with Gawden in the
victualling —in which Ithink he hath done a
very cunning thing, but
Jam sure I am glad of it, and it will be well for the King — to have
him out of this office. When I came home tonight, I find Deb not
come home, and do doubt whether she be not quite gone or no; but
my wife is silent to me in it, and I to her, but fell to other discourse;
and endeed am well satisfied that my house will never be at peace
between my wife and I unless I let her go, though it grieves me to
the heart. My wife and Ispent much time this evening talking of our
being put out of the office and my going to live at Deptford at her
brother’s till Ican clear my accounts and rid my hands of the town —
which will take me a year or more; and I do think it will be best for
me to do so, in order to our living cheap and out of sight.
956