1668-06-13

Sat. Up at 4 a’clock, being by appointment called up to the
1. In fact an unidentified lawyer, c.1460.
924
13 June 1668
Cross Bath, where we were carried one after one another, myself,
and wife, and Betty Turner, Willett, and W. H[ewer]. And by and
by, though we designed to have done before company came, much
company came; very fine ladies; and the manner pretty enough,
only methinks it cannot be clean to go so many bodies together in to
the same water. Good conversation among them that are
acquainted here, and stay together. Strange to see how hot the
water is; and in some places, though this is the most temperate bath,
the springs so hot as the feet not able to endure. But strange to see
when women and men herein, that live all the season in these
waters, that cannot but be parboiled, and look like the creatures of
the Bath. Carried back, wrapped in a sheet, and in a chair, home;
and there one after another thus carried (Istaying above two hours
in the water), home to bed, sweating for an hour; and by and by,
comes music to play to me, extraordinary good as ever I heard at
London almost, or anywhere: 5s. Up, to go to Bristol, about 11
a’clock, and paying my landlord that was our guide from Chiltren,
tos., and the Sergt. of the bath, 1os., and the man that carried us in
chairs, 3s. 6d. Set out towards Bristow, and come thither (in a coach
hired to spare our own horses); the way bad, but country good,
about two a’clock, where set down at the Horse Shoe, and there,
being trimmed by a very handsome fellow, 2s., walked with my
wife and people through the city, which is in every respect another
London, that one can hardly know it, to stand in the country, no
more then that. No carts, it standing generally on vaults, only dog-
carts. So to the Three Cranes Tavern I was directed; but, when I
come in, the master told me that he had newly given over selling of
wine, it seems, grown rich; and so went to the Sun; and there Deb
going with W. H[ewer] and Betty Turner to see her uncle, and
leaving my wife with the mistress of the house, I to see the key,
which is a most large and noble place; and to see the new ship
building by Bailey, neither he nor Furzer being in town. It will be a
fine ship. Spoke with the foreman, and did give the boys that kept
the cabin 2s. Walked back to the Sun, where I find Deb come back,
and with her, her uncle, asober merchant, very good company, and
so like one of our sober, wealthy, London merchants, as pleased me
mightily. Here we dined, and much good talk with him, 7s. 6d: a
messenger to Sir Jo. Knight, who was not at home, 6d. Then walked
with him and my wife and company round the key, and to the ship;
and he shewed me the Custom House, and made me understand
many things of the place, and led us through Marsh street, where our
925
girl was born. But, Lord! the joy that was among the old poor
people of the place, to see Mrs. Willet’s daughter, it seems her
mother being a brave woman and mightily beloved. And so brought
us a back way by surprize to his house, where a substantial good
house, and well furnished; and did give us good entertainment of
strawberries, a whole venison pasty, cold, and plenty of brave wine,
and above all Bristoll milk; where comes in another poor woman,
who, hearing that Deb was here, did come running hither, and with
her eyes so full of tears, and heart so full of joy, that she could not
speak when she come in, that it made me weep too: I protest that I
was not able to speak to her (which I would have done) to have
diverted her tears. His wife a good woman, and so sober and
substantial as Iwas never more pleased anywhere. Servant maid, 2s.
So thence took leave, and he with us through the city, where in
walking I find the city pay him great respect, and he the like to the
meanest, which pleased me mightily. He shewed us the place where
the merchants meet here, and fine cross yet standing, like Cheapside.
And so to the Horse Shoe, where paying the reckoning, 2s. 6d. We
back, and by moonshine to the Bath again, about ten a’clock: bad
way; and giving the coachman Is., went all of us to bed.