1668-05-30

Up, and at the office all the morning. At noon Sir
J.Mennes
and I to the Dolphin tavern, there to meet our neighbours, all of the
Parish, this being procession-day,' to dine—and did; and much very
good discourse, they being most of them very able merchants, as
any in the City — Sir Andr. Rickard, Mr. Vandeputt, Sir Jo.
Fredricke, Harrington, and others. They talked with Mr. Mills
1. Ascension Day, when the parish bounds were beaten.
903
1668 30 April
about the meaning of this day and the other good uses of it; and how
heretofore, and yet in several places, they do whip a boy at every
place they stop at in their procession. Thence I to the Duke of
York’s playhouse and there saw The Tempest, which still pleases me
mightily. And thence to the New Exchange, and then home; and in
the way stopped to talk with Mr. Brisband, who gives me an
account of the rough usage Sir G. Carteret and his counsel had the
other day before the Commissioners of Accounts, and what I do
believe we shall all of us have, in a greater degree then any we have
had yet with them, before their three years are out; which are not
yet begun, nor God knows when they will, this being like to be no
session of Parliament when they now rise. So home, and there took
up Mrs. Turner and carried her to Mile end and drank; and so back,
talking, and so home and to bed, I being mighty cold, this being a
mighty cold day, and I had left off my waistcoat three or four days.
This evening, coming home in the dark, I saw and spoke to our
Nell, Pain’s daughter, and had I not been very cold, I should have
taken her to Tower-hill para talk together et tocar her.
Thus ends this month: my wife in the country. Myself full of
pleasure and expense; and some trouble for my friends, my Lord
Sandwich by the Parliament, and more for my eyes, which are daily
worse and worse, that I dare not write or read almost anything. The
Parliament going in a few days to rise. Myself, so long without
accounting now, for seven or eight months I think or more, that I
know not what condition almost I am in as to getting or spending
for all that time — which troubles me, but I will soon do it. The
kingdom in an ill state through poverty. A fleet going out, and no
money to maintain it or set it out. Seamen yet unpaid, and
mutinous when pressed to go out again. Our office able to do little,
nobody trusting us nor we desiring any to trust us, and yet have not
money to [do} anything but only what perticularly belongs to this
fleet going out, and that but lamely too. The Parliament several
months upon an act for 300000/, but cannot or will not agree upon it
— but do keep it back, in spite of the King’s desires to hasten it, till
they can obtain what they have a mind, in revenge upon some men
for the late ill managements; and he is forced to submit to what they
please, knowing that without it he shall have no money; and they as
well, that if they give the money, the King will suffer them to do
little more. And then the business of religion doth disquiet
everybody, the Parliament being vehement against the noncon-
formists, while the King seems to be willing to countenance them:
904
30 April—s5 May 1668
so we are all poor and in pieces, God help us; while the peace is like
to go on between Spain and France, and then the French may be
apprehended able to attack us. So God help us.
—+MAY4-
2. Up, and at the office all the morning. At noon with Lord
Brouncker in his coach as far as the Temple, and there light and to
Hercules Pillars and there dined; and thence to the Duke of York’s
playhouse at a little past 12, to get a good place in the pit against the
new play; and there setting a poor man to keep my place, I out and
spent an hour at Martin’s my bookseller’s; and so back again, where
I find the house quite full; but I had my place, and by and by the
King comes and the Duke of York; and then the play begins, called
The Sullen lovers or The Impertinents, having many good humours in
it; but the play tedious and no design at allin it. Buta little boy, fora
farce, doth dance Polichinelli the best that ever anything was done
in the world by all men’s report — most pleased with that, beyond
anything in the world, and much beyond all the play. Thence to the
King’s House to see Knipp, but the play done; and so I took a
hackney alone, and to the park and there spend the evening, and to
the Lodge and drank new milk; and so home to the office, ended my
letters and, to spare my eyes, home and played on my pipes; and so
to bed.
5. Up, and all the morning at the office. At noon home to dinner,
and Creed with me; and after dinner, he and I to the Duke of York’s
playhouse; and there coming late, he and I up to the Balcony-box,
where we find my Lady Castlemayne and several great ladies and
there we sat with them. AndI saw The Impertinents once more, now
three times, and the three only days it hath been acted; and to see the
folly how the house doth this day cry up the play more then
yesterday; and I-for that reason like it, I find, the better too. By Sir
Positive At all, I understand, is meant Sir Rob. Howard. My Lady
pretty well pleased with it; but here I sat close to her fine woman,
Willson, who endeed is very handsome, but they say with child by
the King. I asked, and she told me this was the first time her Lady
had seen it, I having a mind to say something to her. One thing of
familiarity I observed in my Lady Castlemayne; she called to one of
905
her women, another that sat by this, fora little patch off of her face,
and put it into her mouth and wetted it and so clapped it upon her
own by the side of her mouth, I suppose she feeling a pimple rising
there. Thence with Creed to Westminster hall and there met with
Cosen Roger, who tells me of the great conference this day between
the Lords and Commons about the business of the East India
Company — as being one of the weightiest conferences that hath
been, and managed as weightily; Iam heartily sorry Iwas not there,
it being upon a mighty point of the privileges of the subjects of
England in regard to the authority of the House of Lords and their
being condemned by them as the supreme court; which they say
ought not to be but by appeal from other courts. And he tells me
that the Commons had much the better of them in reason and
history there quoted, and believes the Lords will let it fall. Thence
to walk in the Hall; and there hear that Mrs. Martin’s child, my
god-daughter, is dead. And so by water to the Old Swan; and
thence home and therealittle at Sir W. Penn’s; and so to bed.