1668-12-20

Lords day. Up and with my wife to church, and then home;
and there found W. Joyce come to dine with me, as troublesome a
talking coxcomb as ever he was — and yet once ina year I like him
well enough. In the afternoon, my wife and W. Hewer andIto
971
Whitehall, where they set me down and stayed till I had been with
the Duke of York, with the rest of us of the office, and dida
little
business; and then the Duke of York in good humour did fall to tell
us many fine stories of the wars in Flanders, and how the Spaniards
are the [best] disciplined foot in the world — will refuse no
extraordinary service if commanded, but scorn to be paid for it, as
in other countries, though at the same time they will beg in the
streets. Not a soldier will carry you a cloak-bag for money for the
world, though he will beg a penny, and will do the thing if
commanded by his commander. That in the citadel of Antwerp, a
soldier hath not a liberty of begging till he hath served three years.
They will cry out against their King and commanders and generals,
none like'them in the world, and yet will not hear a stranger say a
word of them but he will cut his throat. That upon a time, some of
the commanders of their army exclaiming against their generals,
and perticularly the Marquis de Caranene, the confessor of the
Marquis coming by and hearing them, he stops and gravely tells
them that the three great trades of the world are, the Lawyer[s],
who govern the world — the Churchmen, who enjoy the world —
and a sort of fools whom they call Souldiers, who make it their
work to defend the world. He told us too, that Turein being now
become a Catholique, he is likely to get over the head of Colbert,
their interests being contrary; the latter to promote Trade and the
sea (which, says the Duke of York, is that that we have most cause
to fear); and Turin to imploy the King and his forces by land, to
encrease his conquests. Thence to the coach to my wife and so
home; and there with W. Hewer to my office to do some business,
and so set down my journall for four or five days; and then home to
supper and reada little, and to bed. W. Hewer tells me today that he
hears that the King of France hath declared in print that he doth
intend this next summer to forbid his commanders to strike to us,
but that both we and the Dutch shall strike to him. And that he hath
made his captains swear it already, that they will observe it— which
is a great thing if he doth it, as I know nothing to hinder him.