1668-05-15

Up, and betimes to Whitehall and there met with Sir H.
Cholmly at Sir St. Fox’s; and there was also the Cofferer, and we
did there consider about our money and the condition of the Excize;
and after much dispute, agreed upon a state thereof and the manner
of our future course of payments. Thence to the Duke of York and
there did a little Navy business as we used to do; and so to a
Committee for Tanger, where God knows how, my Lord Bellasses
accounts passed, understood by nobody but my Lord Ashly, who I
believe was mad to let them go as he pleased. But here Sir H.
Cholmly had his propositions read, about a greater price for his
work of the Mole, or to do it upon account; which being read, he
was bid to withdraw; but Lord, to see how unlucky a man may be
by chance; for taking an unfortunate minute when they were almost
tired with other business, the Duke of York did find fault with it,
and that made all the rest, that I believe he had better have given a
great deal and had it had nothing said to it today; whereas, I have
seen other things more extravagant pass at first hearing without any
difficulty. Thence I to my Lord Brouncker’s at Mrs. Williams’s and
there dined, and she did show me her closet; which I was sorry to
see, for fear of her expecting something from me; and here she took
notice of my wife’s not once coming to see her; which I am glad of,
for she shall not — a prating, vain, idle woman. Thence with Lord
Brouncker to Loriners hall by Mooregate (a hall [I] never heard of
before) to Sir Tho. Teddiman’s burial - where most people
belonging to the sea were; and here we had rings, and here I do hear
that some of the last words that he said was: that he had a very good
King, God bless him, but that the Parliament had very ill rewarded
him for all the service he had endeavoured to do them and his
country — so that for certain, this did go far towards his death. But
Lord, to see among the young commanders and Tho. Killigrew and
others that came, how unlike a burial this was, Obrian taking out
some ballets out of his pocket, which J read and the rest came about
me to hear; and there very merry we were all, they being new
ballets. By and by the Corps went, and I with my Lord Brouncker
and Dr. Clerke and Mr. Pierce as far as the foot of London bridge;
and there we struck off into Thames street, the rest going to
Redriffe, where he is to be buried. And we light at the Temple and
there parted; and I to the King’s House and there saw the last act of
910
The Committee, thinking to have seen Knepp there, but she did not
act. And so to my bookseller’s and there carried home some books;
among others, Dr. Wilkins’s Reall Character. And thence to Mrs.
Turner’s, and there went and sat and she showed me her house from
top to bottom, which I had not seen before — very handsome. And
here supped; and so home and got Mercer, and she and I in the
garden singing till 10 at night; and so home toa little supper, and
then parted with great content and I to bed. The Duchess of
Monmouth’s hip is I hear now set again, after much pain. I am told
also that the Countesse of Shrewsbery is brought home by the
Duke of Buckingham to his house; where his Duchess saying that it
was not for her and the other to live together in a house, he
answered, ““Why, Madam, I did think so; and therefore have
ordered your coach to be ready to carry you to your father’s;”’
which was a devilish speech, but they say true; and my Lady
Shrewsbry is there it seems.