1668-05-07

Up, and to the office, where all the morning. At noon home to
dinner, and thither I sent for Mercer to dine with me; and after
dinner, she and I called Mrs. Turner and I carried them to the Duke
of York’s House and there saw The Man’s the Maister, which
proves, upon my seeing it again, a very good play. Thence called
Knepp from the King’s House; where going in for her, the play
being done, I did see Becke Marshall come dressed off of the stage,
and looks mighty fine and pretty, and noble — and also Nell in her
boy’s clothes, mighty pretty; but Lord, their confidence, and how
many men do hover about them as soon as they come off of the
stage, and how confident they in their talk. Here I did kiss the pretty
woman newly come, called Pegg, that was Sir Ch. Sidly’s mistress
—a mighty pretty woman, and seems, but is not, modest.* Here
took up Knepp into our coach and all of us with her to her lodging,
and thither comes Bannester with a song of hers that he hath set in
Sir Ch. Sidly’s play for her, which is Ithink but very meanly set; but
this he did before us, teach her; and it being buta
slight, silly, short
ayre, she learnt it presently. But I did here get him to prick me
down the notes of the Echo in The Tempest, which pleases me
mightily. And here was also Haynes, the incomparable dancer of
the King’s house, and a seeming civil man and sings pretty well.
And they gone, we abroad to Marrowbone and there walked in the
garden, the first time I ever there, and a pretty place it is; and here
906
we eat and drank and stayed till 9 at night; and so home by
moonshine, I all the way having mi mano abaxo la jupe de Knepp
con much placer and freedom; but endeavouring afterward to tocar
her con mi cosa, ella did strive against that, but yet I do not think
that she did find much fault with it, but I was a little moved at my
offering it and not having it. And so set Mrs. Knepp at her lodging,
and so the rest and Ihome, talking with a great deal of pleasure, and
so home to bed.