1668-06-11

Thursday. And up, and W. H[ewer] and I up and down the
town, and find it a very brave place with river go through every
street; and a most capacious market-place. The city great, I think
greater then Oxford. But the minster most admirable; as big, I
think, and handsomer than Westmr., and a most large close about
it, and houses for the officers thereof, anda fine palace for the Bp.
So to my lodging back, and took out my wife and people to shew
them the town and church; but they being at prayers, could not be
shown the Quire. A very good Organ; and Ilooked in, and saw the
Bp., my friend Dr. Ward. Thence to the Inne; and there not being
able to hire coach-horses, and not willing to use our own, we got
saddle-horses, very dear. Boy that went to look for them, 6d. So the
three women behind W. H[ewer], Murfd., and our guide, and I
single to Stonehege, over the plain and some prodigious great hills,
even to fright us. Came thither, and find them as prodigious as any
tales I ever heard of them, and worth going this journey to see. God
knows what their use was. They are hard to tell, but yet may be
told. Give the shepherd woman, for leading our horses, 4d. So back
to Wilton, my Lord Pembr’s house, which we could not see, he
being just coming to town; but the situation I do not like, nor the
house promise much, it being in a low but rich valley. So back
home; and there being light, we to the church, and there find them
at prayers again, so could not see the quire; but I sent the women
home, and I did go in, and saw very many fine tombs, and among
the rest some very ancient, of the Montagus. So home to dinner;
and, that being done, paid the reckoning, which was so exorbitant,
and perticularly in rate of my horses, and 7s. 6d. for bread and beer,
that I was mad, and resolve to trouble the mistress about it, and get
something for the poor. And came away in that humour: 21 $s. 6d.
Servants, Is. 6d.; poor, Is.; guide to the stones, 2s.; poor woman in
the street, 1s.; ribbands, 9d.; washwoman, Is.; seamstress for W.
H[ewer], 35.; lent W. Hewer, 2s. Thence about 6 a’clock, and witha
guide went over the smooth plain endeed till night; and then by a
happy mistake, and that looked like an adventure, we were carried
out of our way toa town where we would lie, since we could not go
so far as we would. And there with great difficulty came about 10 at
night toa little inn, where we were fain to go into a room where a
pedlar was in bed, and made him rise; and there wife and I lay, and
923
in a truckle-bed Betty Turner and Willet. But good beds, and the
master of the house a sober, understanding man, and I had
pl[?easant] discourse with him about this country matters, as Wool
and Corne and other things. And he also merry, and made us
mighty merry at supper, about manning the new ship, at Bristol,
with none but men whose wifes do master them; and it seems it is
become in reproach to some men of estate that are such hereabouts,
that this is become common talk. By and by to bed, glad of this
mistake, because, it seems, had we gone on as we pretended, we
could not have passed with our coach, and must have lain on the
plain all night. This day from Salsb. I wrote by the post my excuse
for not coming home, which I hope will do, for Iam resolved to see
the Bath, and, it may be, Bristol.