1668-03-23

Up, and after discoursing with my wife about many things
touching this day’s dinner, I abroad; and first to the tavern to pay
what I owe there, but missed of seeing the mistress of the house.
And there bespoke wine for dinner; and so away thence and to
Bishopsgate street, thinking to have found a Harpsicon-maker that
used to live there before the fire, but he is gone; and I have a mind
forthwith to havea little Harpsicon made me — to confirm and help
me in my music notions, which my head is nowadays full of, and I
do believe will come to something that is very good. Thence to
Whitehall, expecting to have heard the Bishop of Lincolne, my
friend, preach, for so I understood he would do yesterday, but was
mistaken; and therefore away presently back again and there find
everything in good order against dinner; and at noon come Mr.
Pierce and she, and Mrs. Manuel the Jew’s wife, and Mrs. Corbett,
and Mrs. Pierce’s boy and girl. But we are defeated of Knepp by her
being forced to act today, and also of Harris; which did trouble me,
they being my chief guests. However, Ihad an extraordinary good
dinner, and the better because dressed by my own servants — and
were mighty merry; and here was Mr. Pelling, by chance came and
dined with me. And after sitting long at dinner, I had a barge ready
at Tower wharfe to take us in; and so we went, all of us, up as high
as Barne elmes, 2 very fine day, and all the way sang; and Mrs.
Manuel sings very finely and is a mighty discreet, sober-carriaged
woman, that both my wife and I are mightily taken with her; and
sings well, and without importunity or the contrary. At Barne
Elms we walked round; and then to the barge again and had much
merry talk and good singing; and came before it was [dark] back to
the New Exchange stairs, and there landed and walked up to Mrs.
Pierce’s, where we sat awhile and then up to their dining-room; and
so havinga violin and theorbo, did fall to dance, here being also Mr.
Floyd come thither, and by and by Mr. Harris. But there being so
few of us that could dance, and my wife not being very well, we had
not much pleasure in the dancing (there was Knepp also, by which
with much pleasure we did singalittle); and so about 10 a-clock I
took coach with my wife and Deb, and so home and there to bed.
892
24 March 1668
24. Up pretty betimes; and so there comes to me Mr. Shish to
desire my appearing for him to succeed Mr. Chr. Pett, lately dead,
in his place of Maister-Shipwright of Deptford and Woolwich;
which I do resolve to promote when I can. So by and by to
Whitehall and there to the Duke of York’s chamber, where I
understand it is already resolved by the King and Duke of York that
Shish shall have the place. From the Duke’s chamber, Sir W.
Coventry and I to walk inthe Matted Gallery; and there, among
other things, he tells me of the wicked design that now is at last
contriving against him, to get a petition presented from people, that
the money they have paid to W. Coventry for their places may be
repaid them back. And that this is set on by Temple and Hollis of
the Parliament and among other mean people in it, by Capt.
Tatnell. And he prays me that I will use some effectual way to sift
Tatnell what he doth, and who puts him on on this business; which
I do undertake, and will do with all my skill for his service — being
troubled that he is still under this difficulty. Thence up and down
Westminster, by Mrs. Burroughes her mother’s shop, thinking to
have seen her, but could not; and therefore back to Whitehall,
where great talk of the tumult at the other end of the town about
Moorefields among the prentices, taking the liberty of these
holidays to pull down bawdy houses. And Lord, to see the
apprehensions which this did give to all people at Court, that
presently order was given for all the soldiers, horse and foot, to be
in armes; and forthwith alarmes were beat by drum and trumpet
through Westminster, and all to their colours and to horse, as if the
French were coming into the town. So Creed, whom I met here,
and Ito Lincolnes Inn fields, thinking to have gone into the fields to
have seen the prentices; but here we found these fields full of
soldiers all in a body, and my Lord Craven commanding of them,
and riding up and down to give orders like a madman. And some
young men we saw brought by soldiers to the guard at Whitehall,
and overheard others that stood by say that it was only for pulling
down of bawdy houses. And none of the bystanders finding fault
with them, but rather of the soldiers for hindering them. And we
heard a Justice of Peace this morning say to the King that he had
been endeavouring to suppress this tumult, but could not; and that
imprisoning some in the new prison at Clerkenwell, the rest did
come and break open the prison and release them. And that they do
give out that they are for pulling down of bawdy houses, which is
one of the great grievances of the nation. To which the King made a
893
very poor, cold, insipid answer: ‘““Why, why do they go to them,
then?”’, and that was all, and had no mind to go on with the
discourse.
Mr. Creed and I to dinner to my Lord Crew, where little
discourse, and there being none but us at the table and my Lord and
my Lady Jemimah. And so after dinner away, Creed and I, to
Whitehall, expecting a committee of Tanger, but came too late. So!
to attend the Council, and by and by were called in with Lord
Brouncker and Sir W. Penn to advise how to pay awayalittle
money to most advantage to the men of the yards, to make them
despatch the ships going out; and there I did make alittle speech,
which was well liked. And after all, it was found most satisfactory
to the men and best for the King’s despatch, that what money we
had should be paid weekly to the men for their week’s work, until a
greater sum could be got to pay them their arreares and then
discharge them. But Lord, to see what shifts and what cares and
thoughts there was imployed in this matter, how to do the King’s
work and please the men and stop clamours, would make a man
think the King should not eat a bit of good meat till he hath got
money to pay the men — but I do not see the least print of care or
thoughts in him about it all. Having done here, I out and there met
Sir Fr. Hollis, who doth still tell me that above all things in the
world he wishes he had my tongue in his mouth; meaning, since my
speech in Parliament. He took Lord Brouncker and me down to the
guards, he and his company being upon the guards today; and there
he did, ina handsome room to that purpose, make us drink, and did
call for his Bagpiper; which, with pipes of ebony tipped with silver,
he did play beyond anything of that kind that ever Iheard in my life.
And with great pains he must have obtained it, but with pains that
the instrument doth not deserve at all; for at the best, it is mighty
barbarous music. So home, and there to my chamber to prick out
my song, It is decreed, intending to have it ready to give Mr. Harris
on Thursdy when we meet for him to sing, believing that he will do
it more right then a woman that sings better, unless it were Knipp —
which I cannot have opportunity to teach it to.