1668-08-23

Lords day. Up betimes, my head busy on my great letter, and I
did first hang up my new map of Paris in my green room — and
changed others in other places. Then to Capt. Cocke’s, thinking to
have talked more of what he told me yesterday, but he was not
within; so back to church and heard a good sermon of Mr. Gifford’s
at our church, upon “‘Seek ye first the Kingdom of Heaven and its
righteousness, and all these things shall be added to you.”’ A very
excellent and persuasive, good and moral sermon; showed like a
wise man that righteousness is a surer moral way of being rich then
sin and villainy. Then home to dinner, where Mr. Pelling, who
brought us a hare, which we had at dinner, and W. How. After
dinner to the office, Mr. Gibson and I, to examine my letter to the
Duke of York; which to my great joy, I did very well by my paper
tube, without pain to my eyes. AndI do mightily like what I have
therein done; [and] did, according to the Duke of York’s order,
make haste to St. James’; and about 4 a-clock got thither, and there
the Duke of York was ready to expect me, and did hear it all over
with extraordinary content and did give me many and hearty
thanks, and in words the most expressive tell me his sense of my
good endeavours, and that he would have a care of me on all
occasions, and did with much inwardness tell me what was doing,
suitable almost to what Capt. Cocke tells me, of design to make
alterations in the Navy; and is most open to me in them, and with
utmost confidence desires my further advice on all occasions. And
he resolves to have my letter transcribed and sent forthwith to the
office. So, with as much satisfaction as I could possibly or did hope
for, and obligation on the Duke of York’s side professed to me, I
away into the park, and there met Mr. Pierce and his wife and sister
and brother and little boy, and with them to Mullbery garden and
spent 18s. on them; and there left them, she being again with child,
939
and by it, the least pretty that ever Isaw her; and so Iaway and gota
coach and home; and there with [my] wife and W. Hewers talking
all the evening, my mind running on the business of the office, to
see what more I can do to the rendering myself acceptable and
useful to all and to the King: we to supper and to bed.