1668-11-20

This morning up, with mighty kind words between my poor
wife and I; and so to Whitehall by water, W. Hewer with me, who
is to go with me everywhere until my wife be in condition to go out
along with me herself; for she doth plainly declare that she dares not
trust me out alone, and therefore made it a piece of our league that I
should alway take somebody with me, or her herself; which I am
mighty willing to, being, by the grace of God resolved never to do
her wrong more. We landed at the Temple, and there I did bid him
call at my Cosen Roger Pepys’s lodgings, and I stayed in the street
for him; and so took water again at the Strand stairs and so to
Whitehall, in my way Itelling him plainly and truly my resolutions,
if I can get over this evil, never to give new occasion for it. He is, I
think, so honest and true a servant to us both, and one that loves us,
that I was not much troubled at his being privy to all this, but
rejoiced in my heart that Ihad him to assist in the making us friends;
which he did do truly and heartily, and with good success — for I did
get him to go to Deb to tell her that I had told my wife all of my
being with her the other night, that so, if my wife should send, she
964
20 November 1668
might not make the business worse by denying it. While I was at
Whitehall with the Duke of York doing our ordinary business with
him, here being also the first time the new Treasurers, W. Hewer
did go to her and come back again; and so | took him into St.
James’s park, and there he did tell me he had been with her and
found what I said about my manner of being with her true, and had
given her advice as I desired. I did there enter into more talk about
my wife and myself, and he did give me great assurance of several
perticular cases to which my wife had from time to time made him
privy of her loyalty and truth to me after many and great
temptations, and I believe them truly. I did also discourse the
unfitness to my leaving of my imployment now in many respects,
to go into the country as my wife desires — but that I would labour
fit myself for it; which he thoroughly understands, and doth agree
with me in it; and so, hoping to get over this trouble, we about our
business to Westminster hall to meet Roger Pepys; whichI did, and
did there discourse of the business of lending him so0o/ to answer
some occasions of his, which I believe to be safe enough; and so
took leave of him and away by coach home, calling on my coach-
maker by the way, where Ilike my little coach mightily. But when I
came home, hoping for a further degree of peace and quiet, I find
my wife upon her bed in a horrible rage afresh, calling me all the
bitter names; and rising, did fall to revile me in the bitterest manner
in the world, and could not refrain to strike me and pull my hair;
which I resolved to bear with, and had good reason to bear it. So I
by silence and weeping did prevail with hera
little to be quiet, and
she would not eat her dinner without me; but yet by and by into a
raging fit she fell again worse then before, that she would slit the
girl’s nose; and at last W. Hewer came in and came up, who did
allay her fury, I flinging myself in a sad desperate condition upon
the bed in the blue room, and there lay while they spoke together;
and at last it came to this, that if | would call Deb ‘“‘whore”’ under
my hand, and write to her that I hated her and would never see her
more, she would believe me and trust me — which I did agree to,
only, as to the name of ‘‘whore” I would have excused, and
therefore wrote to her sparing that word; which my wife thereupon
tore it, and would not be satisfied till, W. Hewer winking upon me,
I did write so, with the name of a whore, as that I did fear she might
too probably have been prevailed upon to have been a whore by her
carriage to me, and therefore, as such, I did resolve never to see her
more. This pleased my wife, and she gives it W. Hewer to carry to
965
her, with a sharp message from her. So from that minute my wife
begun to be kind to me, and we to kiss and be friends, and so
continued all the evening and fell to talk of other matters with great
comfort, and after supper to bed.
This evening comes Mr. Billup to me to read over Mr. Wren’s
alterations of my draft ofa letter for the Duke of York to sign, to the
Board; whichI like mighty well, they being not considerable, only
in mollifying some hard terms which | had thought fit to put in.
From this to other discourse; I do find that the Duke of York and his
servant Mr. Wren do look upon this service of mine as a very
seasonable service to the Duke of York, as that which he will have
to show to his enemies in his own justification of his care of the
King’s business. And I am sure I am heartily gladof it— both for the
King’s sake and the Duke of York’s, and my own also — forif I
continue, my work, by this means, will be the less, and my share in
the blame also. He being gone, I to my wife again and so spent the
evening with very great joy, and the night also, with good sleep and
rest, my wife only troubled in her rest, but less then usual — for
which the God of Heaven be praised. I did this night promise to my
wife never to go to bed without calling upon God upon my knees
by prayer; and Ibegun this night, and hopeI shall never forget to do
the like all my life — for I do find that it is much the best for my soul
and body to live pleasing to God and my poor wife — and will ease
me of much care, as well as much expense.