1668-02-24

Up, and to my office, where most of the morning entering
my Journall for the three days past. Thence about noon with my
wife to the New Exchange, by the way stopping at my bookseller’s
and there leaving my Kircher’s Musurgia to be bound, and did buy
Liillustre Bassa in four volumes for my wife. Thence to the
Exchange and left her; while meeting Dr. Gibbons there, he andI to
see an Organ at the Deane of Westminster’s lodgings at the Abby,
the Bishop of Rochester’s, where he lives like a great prelate, his
lodgings being very good, though at present under great disgrace at
Court, being put by his Clerk of the Closet’s place. Isaw his lady, of
whom the Terrae filius of Oxford was once so merry — and two
children, whereof one very pretty little boy like him, so fat and
black. Here I saw the organ; but it is too big for my house and the
fashion doth not please me enough, and therefore will not have it.
Thence to the Change back again leaving him, and took my wife
and Deb home and there to dinner alone; and after dinner I took
them to the Nursery, where none of us ever was before; where the
house is better and the Musique better then we looked for, and the
acting not much worse, because I expected as bad as could: and I
was not much mistaken, for it was so. However, I was pleased well
to see it once, it being worth a man’s seeing to discover the different
ability and understanding of people, and the different growths of
people’s abilities by practice. Their play was a bad one, called
Jeronimo is Mad Again—a tragedy. Here was some good company by
1. She was married to John Jackson at Brampton on 27 February.
880
us who did make mighty sport at the folly of their Acting, which I
could not neither refrain from sometimes, though Iwas sorry for it.
So away thence home, where to the office to do business a while,
and then home to supper and to read, and then to bed. Iwas prettily
served this day at the playhouse door; where giving six shillings
into the fellow’s hand for us three, the fellow by legerdemain did
convey one away, and with so much grace face me down that I did
give him but five, that though I knew the contrary, yet I was
overpowered by his so grave and serious demanding the other
shilling that I could not deny him, but was forced by myself to give
it him. After I came home this evening comes a letter to me from
Capt. Allin, formerly Clerk of the Ropeyard at Chatham and
whom] was kind to in those days, who in recompense of my favour
to him then doth give me notice that he hears of an accusation likely
to be exhibited against me, ofmy receiving sol of Mason the timber
merchant, and that his wife hath spoke it. lam mightily beholden to
Capt. Allin for this, though the thing is to the best of my memory
utterly false, and I do believe it to be wholly so; but yet it troubles
me to have my name mentioned in this business, and more to
consider how I may be liable to be accused where I have endeed
taken presents, and therefore puts me upon an enquiry into my
actings in this kind and prepare against a day of accusation.