1668-02-23

At the office all the morning and at noon find the Bishop of
Lincolne come to dine with us; and after him comes Mr. Brisban,
and there mighty good company; but the Bishop a very extraordi-
nary good-natured man and one that is mightily pleased, as well as I
am, that Ilive so near Bugden, the seat of his Bishopricke, where he
is like to reside; and endeed I am glad of it. In discourse, we think
ourselfs safe for this year by this league with Holland, which pleases
everybody, and they say vexes France; insomuch that De lestrade
the French Imbassador in Holland, when he heard it, told the States
that he would have them not forget that his Maister is in the head of
100000 men, and is but 28 years old— which was a great speech. The
Bishop tells me he thinks that the great business of Toleration will
not, notwithstanding this talk, be carried this Parliament; nor for
the King’s taking away the Deanes and Chapters’ lands to supply
his wants, they signifying little to him — if he had them for his
present service. He gone, I mightily pleased with his kindness, I to
the office, where busy till night; and then to Mrs. Turners, where
my wife and Deb and I and Batelier spent that night and supped and
played at Cards, and very merry; and so Ihome to bed. She is either
a very prodigal woman or richer then she would be thought, by her
buying of the best things and laying out much money in new-
fashioned pewter; and among other things, a new-fashion case for a
pair of Snuffers, which is very pretty, but I could never have
guessed what it was for had I not seen the snuffers in it.
868
31 January 1668
31. Upand by coach, with W. Griffin with me and our contract-
books, to Durham Yard to the Commissioners for Accounts — the
first time I ever was there; and staying a while before Iwas admitted
to them, I did observe a great many people attending about
complaints of seamen concerning tickets; and among others, Mr.
Carcasse and Mr. Martin my purser. And I observe a fellow, one
Collins, is there, who is imployed by these Commissioners
perticularly to hold an office in Bishopsgate street, or somewhere
thereabouts, to receive complaints of all people about tickets — and I
believe he will have work enough. Presently Iwas called in, where I
found the whole number of Commissioners, and was there
received with great respect and kindness and did give them great
satisfaction, making it my endeavour to inform them what it was
they were to expect from me and what was the duty of other
people, this being my only way to preserve myself after all my pains
and trouble. They did ask many questions and demand other books
of me; which I did give them very ready and acceptable answers to;
and upon the whole, I observe they do go about their business like
men resolved to go through with it, and ina very good method, like
men of understanding. They have Mr. Jessop their secretary; and it
is pretty to see that they are fain to find out an old-fashion man of
Cromwell’s to do their business for them, as well as the Parliament
to pitch upon such for the most part in the list of people that were
brought into the House for Commissioners. | went away with
giving and receiving great satisfaction; and so away to Whitehall to
the Commissioners of Treasury — where waiting some time, I met
there with Coll. Birch and he andI fell into discourse, and Idid give
him thanks for his kindness to me in the Parliament-house, both
before my face and behind my back; he told me he knew me to bea
man of the old way for taking pains, and did always endeavour to
do me right and prevent anything that was moved that might tend
to my injury — which I was obliged to him for, and thanked him.
Thence to talk of other things and the want of money and he told
me of the general want of money in the country; that land sold for
nothing, and the many pennyworths he knew of lands and houses
upon them with good titles in his country, at 16 years’ purchase.
“And,” says he, “though I am in debt, yet I have a mind to one, and
that is a Bishop’s lease;” “But,” said I, “will you choose sucha
lease
before any other?” - “Yes,” says he plainly, “because I know they
cannot stand, and then it will fall into the King’s hands, and I in
possession shall have an advantage by it — and,”’ says he, “I know
869
1668 31 _January—2 February
they must fall, and they are now near it, taking all the ways they can
to undo themselfs and showing us the way;”’ and thereupon told me
a story of the present quarrel between the Bishop and Deane of
Coventry and Lichfield; the former of which did excommunicate
the latter and caused his excommunication to be read in the church
while he was there; and after it was read, the Deane made the service
be gone through with, though himself, an excommunicate, was
present (which is contrary to the Canon), and said he would justify
the Quire therein against the Bishop; and so they are at law in the
Arches about it — which is a very pretty story. He tells me that the
King is for Toleration, though the Bishops be against it; and that he
doth not doubt but it will be carried in Parliament but that he fears
some will stand for the tolerating of papists with the rest; and that
he knows not what to say to, but rather thinks that the sober party
will be without it rather then have it upon those terms — and I do
believe so. Here we broke off, and I home to dinner; and after
dinner set down my wife and Deb at the Change, and I to make a
visit to Mr. Godolphin at his lodgings; who is come late from Spain
from my Lord Sandwich, and did the other day, meeting me in
Whitehall, compliment me mightily; and so I did offer him this
visit, but missed him. And so back and took up my wife and set her
at Mrs. Turner’s, and I to my bookbinder’s and there till late at
night, binding up my second part of my Tanger accounts; andIall
the while observing his working and his manner of gilding books
with great pleasure; and so home and there busy late, and then to
bed.
~+FEBRUARY#-
2. Lords day. Wife took physic this day. I all day at home, and all
the morning setting my books in order in my presses for the
fallowing year, their number being much encreased since the last,
so as I am fain to lay by several books to make room for better,
being resolved to keep no more then just my presses will contain.
At noon to dinner, my wife coming down to me; and a very good
dinner we had, of a powdered leg of pork and a loin of lamb roasted
—and with much content, she and I and Deb. After dinner, my head
combed an hour together, and then to work again —and at it, doing
many things towards the setting my accounts and papers in order;
870
and so in the evening, Mr. Pelling supping with us, to supper and so
to bed.