1668-06-30

Up, and put on anew summer black bombazin suit, and so to
the office; and being come now to an agreement with my barber to
keep my perriwigs in good order at 20s. a year, Iam like to go very
spruce, more thenI used to do. All the morning at the office; and at
noon home to dinner, and so to the King’s playhouse and there saw
Philaster; where it is pretty to see how I could remember almost all
along, ever since I was a boy, Arethusa’s part which I was to have
acted at Sir Rob. Cooke’s; and it was very pleasant to me, but more
to think what a ridiculous thing it would have been for me to have
acted a beautiful woman. Thence to Mrs. Pierces, and there saw
Knepp also, and were merry; and here saw my little Lady Kath.
Mountagu, come to town about her eyes, which are sore, and they
think the King’s Evil, poor pretty lady. Here I was freed from a fear
that Knepp was angry or might take advantage; did parlar the esto
that yo did the otra day quand yo was con her in ponendo her mano
upon mi cosa — but I saw no such thing; but as pleased as ever, and I
believe she can bear with any such thing. Thence to the New
Exchange, and there met Harris and Rolt and one Richards, a tailor
and great company-keeper; and with these over to Foxhall and
there fell into the company of Harry Killigrew, a rogue, newly
come back out of France but still in disgrace at our Court, and
young Newport:and others, as very rogues as any in the town, who
were ready to take hold of every woman that came by them. And so
to supper in an arbor; but Lord, their mad bawdy talk did make my
heart ake. And here I first understood by their talk the meaning of
the company that lately were called “Ballers”, Harris telling how it
was by a meeting of some young blades, where he was among
them, and my Lady Bennet and her ladies, and there dancing naked,
919
1668 30 May—4 June
and all the roguish things in the world. But Lord, what loose cursed
company was this that I was in tonight; though full of wit and
worth a man’s being in for once, to know the nature of it and their
manner of talk and lives. Thence set Rolt and some of [them] at the
New Exchange, and so I home; and my business being done at the
office, I to bed.
—}JUNE4-
1. Up, and with Sir J. Mennes to Westminster; and in the hall
there I met with Harris and Rolt and carried them to the Rhenish
winehouse, where I have not been in a morning, nor any tavern |
think, these seven years and more. Here I did get the words of a
song of Harris that I wanted. Here was also Mr. Young and
Whistler by chance met us and drank with us. Thence home and to
prepare business against the afternoon; and did walk an hour in the
garden with Sir W. Warren, who doth tell me of the great difficulty
he is under in the business of his accounts with the Commissioners
of Parliament, and I fear some inconveniences and troubles may be
occasioned thereby to me. So to dinner, and then with SirJ. Mennes
to Whitehall; and there attended the Lords of the Treasury and alsoa
committee of Council with the Duke of York about the charge of
this year’s fleet; and thence I to Westminster, and to Mrs. Martins
and did hazer what yo would con her, and did aussi tocar la thigh de
su landlady. And thence all alone to Foxhall and walked, and saw
young Newport and two more rogues of the town seize on two
ladies, who walked with them an hour with their masks on, perhaps
civil ladies; and there I left them, and so home and thence to Mr.
Mills’s, where I never was before, and here find (whom I endeed
saw go in, and that did make me go thither) Mrs. Halworthy and
Mrs. Andrews; and here supped and extraordinary merry till one in
the morning, Mr. Andrews coming to us: and mightily pleased
with this night’s company and mirth, I home to bed. Mrs. Turner
too was with us.
4. Up, and to the office, where all the morning. And at noon
home to dinner, where Mr. Clerke the solicitor dined with me and
my clerks. After dinner I carried and set him down at the Temple,
he observing to me how St. Sepulchers church steeple is repaired
920
already a good deal, and the Fleet bridge is contracted for by the
City to begin to be built this summer; which doth please me
mightily. I to Whitehall and walked through the park fora little
ayre; and so back to the Council chamber to the Committee of the
Navy, about the business of fitting the present fleet suitable to the
money given; which as the King orders it and by what appears, will
be very little, and so as I perceive the Duke of York will have
nothing to command, nor can intend to go abroad. But it is pretty
to see how careful these great men are to do everything so as they
may answer it to the Parliament.
The entries from 5-17 June are written in note form on sheets ofpaper
inserted into the volume, where ten pages are left blank for the finished
version which Pepys never composed. A few changes have been made in this
version of the notes: the dates of the entries are given in the form Pepys
normally used in the finished diary; where words are repeated they are
omitted although they have not been struck through, and the money sums
have been abbreviated. A draft letter has also been omitted.