1668-09-25

Up, and by water to St. James’s and there with Mr. Wren did
discourse about my great letter; which the Duke of York hath given
him and he hath set it to be transcribed by Billup his man, whom, as
he tells me, he can most confide in for secrecy. And is much pleased
with it, and earnest to have it with us; and he and IJ are like to be
much together in the considering how to reform the Office, and
that by the Duke of York’s command. Thence I, mightily pleased
with this success, away to the office, where all the morning, my
head full of this business; and it is pretty how Lord Brouncker this
day did tell ine how he hears that a design is on foot to remove us
out of the office, and proposes that we two do agree to draw up a
form of a new constitution of the office, there to provide remedies
for the evils we are now under, that so we may be beforehand with
the world — which I agreed to, saying nothing of my design. And
the truth is, he is the best man of them all, and I would be glad, next
myself, to save him; for as he deserves best, so I doubt he needs his
place most. So home to dinner at noon, and all the afternoon busy at
the office till night; and then, with my mind full of businesses now
in my head, I to supper and to bed.
26-27. Up, and to the office, where all the morning almost, busy
about business against the afternoon; and we metalittle, to sign
two or three things at the Board of moment. And thence at noon
home to dinner, and so away to Whitehall by water, in my way to
the Old Swan finding a great many people gathered together in
Cannon street about a man that was working in the ruins, and the
ground did sink under him, and he sunk in and was forced to be dug
out again, but without hurt. Thence to Whitehall; and it is strange
to see with what speed the people imployed do pull down Paul’s
steeple — and with what ease. It is said that it and the Quire are to be
taken down this year, and another church begun in the room
thereof the next. At Whitehall we met at the Treasury chamber, and
there before the Lords did debate our draft of the victualling
contract with the several bidders for it— which were Sir D. Gawden
— Mr. Child and his fellows, and Mr. Dorrington and his — a poor
940
variety in a business of this value. There till after candle-lighting,
and so home by coach with Sir D. Gawden, who by the way tells
me how the City doth go on in several things toward the building of
the public places; which I am glad to hear, and gives hope that in a
few years it will be a glorious place. But we met with several stops
and new troubles in the way in the streets, so as makes it bad to
travel in the dark now through the City. So I to Mr. Bateliers by
appointment, where I find my wife and Deb and Mercer — Mrs.
Pierce and her husband, son and daughter; and Knipp and Harris;
and W. Batelier and his sister Mary and cousin Gumbleton, a good-
humoured, fat young gentleman, son to the Jeweller, that dances
well. And here danced all night long, with a noble supper; and
about 2 in the morning, the table spread again for a noble breakfast,
beyond all moderation, that put me out of countenance — so much
and so good. Mrs. Pierce and her people went home betimes, she
being big with child; but Knipp and the rest stayed till almost 3 in
the morning, and then broke up and Knipp home with us; and I to
bed and rose about 6 — mightily pleased with this night’s mirth; and
away by water to St. James’s and there with Mr. Wren did correct
his copy of my letter; which the Duke of York hath signed in my
very words, without alteration of a syllable.
And so, pleased therewith, I to my Lord Brouncker, who I find
within, but hath business and so comes not to the office today; and
so I by water to the office, where we sat all the morning; and just as
the Board rises, comes the Duke of York’s letter; which I knowing,
and the Board not being full and desiring rather to have the Duke of
York deliver himself to us, I suppressed it for this day, my heart
beginning to falsify in this business — as being doubtful of the
trouble it may give me by provoking them; but however, I am
resolved to go through it, and it is too late to help it now. At noon to
dinner to Capt. Cocke’s, where I met with Mr. Wren, my going
being to tell him what I have done; which he likes — and to confer
with Cocke about our office; who tells me that he is confident the
design of removing our officers doth hold, but that he is sure that I
am safe enough ~ which pleases me; though I do not much show it
to him, but as a thing indifferent. So away home, and there met at
Sir Rd. Ford’s with the Duke of York’s Commissioners about our
prizes, with whom we shall have some trouble before we make an
end with them. And thence, stayingalittle with them, I with my
wife and W. Batelier and Deb; carried them to Bartholomew fayre,
where we saw the dancing of the ropes and nothing else, it being
941
1668 27 August—4 September
late; and so back home to supper and to bed — after having done at
my Office.
—+SEPTEMBER*%-
3. Up, and to the office, where busy till it was time to go to the
Commissioners of Accounts — which I did about noon, and there
was received with all possible respect, their business being only to
explain the meaning of one of their late demands to us, which we
had not answered in our answer to them; and this being done, away
with great content, my mind being troubled before; and so to the
Exchequer and several places, calling on several businesses, and
perticularly my bookseller’s, among others, for Hobbs’s Leviathan,
which is now mightily called for; and what was heretofore sold for
8s. Inow give 245. at the second hand, and is sold for 30s., it being a
book the Bishops will not let be printed again. And so home to
dinner, and then to the office all the afternoon; and towards the
evening, by water to the Commissioners of the Treasury; and
presently back again and there met a little with W. Penn, and so W.
Penn and Lord Brouncker and J at the lodging of the latter to read
over our new drafts of the victualler’s contract; and so broke up,
and home to supper and to bed.
4. Up, and met at the office all the morning; and at noon, my wife
and Deb and Mercer and W. Hewer to the Fair, and there at the old
house did eat a pig, and was pretty merry; but saw no sights, my
wife having a mind to see the play, Bartholomew fayre with puppets;
which we did, and it is an excellent play; the more I see it, the more I
love the wit of it; only, the business of abusing the puritans begins
to grow stale, and of no use, they being the people that at last will be
found the wisest. And here Knipp came to us and sat with us, and
thence took coach in two coaches; and losing one another, my wife
and Knipp and I to Hercules Pillars and there supped, and I did take
from her both the words and notes of her song of the Larke, which
pleases me mightily. And so set her at home, and away we home,
where our company came home before us. This night, Knipp tells
us that there is a Spanish woman, lately come over, that pretends to
sing as well as Mrs. Knight; both of which I must endeavour to
hear. So after supper, to bed.
942