1668-02-17

Up and to the office, where all the morning till noon getting
some things more ready against the afternoon for the Committee of
Accounts — which did give me great trouble, to see how I am forced
to dance after them in one place and to answer committees of
877
1668 17 February
Parliament in another. At noon thence toward the committee; but
meeting with Sir W. Warren in Fleet street, he and I to the ordinary
by Temple bar and there dined together, and to talk, where he doth
seem to be very high now in defiance of the Board: now he says that
the worst is come upon him, to have his accounts brought to the
Committee of Accounts, and he doth reflect upon my late coldness
to him; but upon the whole, I do find that he is still a cunning
fellow, and will find it necessary to be fair to me; and what hath
passed between us of kindness, to hold his tongue — which doth
please me very well. Thence to the Committee, where I did deliver
the several things they expected from me with great respect and
show of satisfaction, and my mind thereby eased of some care. But
thence I,to Westminster hall and there spent till late at night,
walking to and again with many people; and there in general I hear
of the great high words that was in the House on Saturdy last, upon
the first part of the Committee’s Report about the dividing of the
fleet;' wherein some would have the counsels of the King to be
declared, and the reasons of them and who did give them; where Sir
W. Coventry lay open to them the consequences of doing that, that
the King would never have any honest and wise men ever to be of
his Council. They did here in the House talk boldly of the King’s
bad counsellors, and how they must be all turned out, and many of
them, and better, brought in; and the proceedings of the Long
Parliament in the beginning of the war were called to memory. And
the King’s bad intelligence was mentioned, wherein they were
bitter against my Lord Arlington; saying, among other things, that
whatever Morrices was, who declared he had but 750! a year
allowed him for intelligence, the King paid too dear for my Lord
Arlington’s in giving him 10000! and a Barony for it. Some
mutterings Idid hear of a design of dissolveing the Parliament, but I
think there is no ground for it yet, though Oliver would have
dissolved them for half the trouble and contempt these have put
upon the King and his councils. The dividing of the fleet, however,
is I hear voted a miscarriage, and the not building a fortification at
Sherenesse; and I have reason every hour to expect that they will
vote the like of our paying men off by ticket; and what the
consequence of that will be I know not, but am put thereby into
great trouble of mind. Idid spendalittle time at the Swan, and there
did kiss the maid Sarah. At night home, and there up to my wife,
1. In the Four Days Battle, June 1666: see above, p. 630 (10 June) & n.
878
whois still ill, and supped with her, my mind mighty full of trouble
for the office and my concernments therein; and so to supper and
talking with W. Hewer in her chamber about business of the office,
wherein he doth well understand himself and our case, and it doth
me advantage to talk with him and the rest of my people. I to bed
below, as I did last night.