1668-08-31

Up, and at my office all the morning. About noon, with Mr.
Ashburnham to the new Excise Office; and there discoursed about
our business and I made him admire my drawing a thing presently
in shorthand; but God knows, I have paid dear for it in my eyes.
Home and to dinner; and then my wife and Deb and I withSir J.
Mennes to Whitehall, she going thence to New Exchange; and the
Duke of York not being in the way, J. Mennes and I to her and took
them two to the King’s House to see the first day of Lacy’s Monsieur
Ragou, now new-acted. The King and Court all there, and mighty
merry: a Farce. Thence, Sir
J.Mennes giving us like a gentleman his
coach, hearing we had some business, we to the park, and so home;
little pleasure there, there being little company. But mightily taken
with a little chariot that we saw in the street, and which we are
resolved to have ours like it. So home to walk in the gardenalittle,
and then to bed. The month ends mighty sadly with me, my eyes
being now past all use almost; and I am mighty hot upon trying the
936
31 July—16 August 1668
late printed experiment of paper Tubes.
-*AUGUST4-
11. Up, and by water to Sir W. Coventry to visit him, whom I
find yet troubled at the Commissioners of Accounts about this
business of Sir W. Warren; which is a ridiculous thing — and can
come to nothing but contempt. And thence to Westminster hall,
where the Parliament met enough to adjourne, which they did, to
the roth of November next; and so I by water home to the office,
and so to dinner; and thence at the office all the afternoon till night,
being mightily pleased withalittle trial I have made of the use of a
Tube spectacall of paper, tried with my right eye. This day, I hear
that to the great joy of the nonconformists, the time is out of the Act
against them, so that they may meet; and they have declared that
they will have a morning lecture up again, which is pretty strange,
and they are connived at by the King everywhere I hear, in city and
country. So to visit W. Penn, who is yet ill; and then home, where
W. Batelier and Mrs. Turner came and sat and supped with us; and
so they gone, we to bed. This afternoon, my wife and Mercer and
Deb went with Pelling to see the Gipsys at Lambeth and have their
fortunes told; but what they did, I did not enquire.
13. Up, and Greeting comes and there he andI tried some things
of Mr. Lockes for two flagelettes, to my great content; and this day
my wife begins again to learn of him, for Ihavea great mind for her
to be able to play a part with me. Thence to the office, where all the
morning; and then to dinner, where W. How dined with me, who
tells me for certain that Creed is like to speed in his match with Mrs.
Betty Pickering. Here dined with me also Mr. Hollier, who is
mighty vain in his pretence to talk Latin. So to the office again all
the afternoon till night, very busy; and so with much content home
at night, and made my wife sing and play on the flagelette to me till I
slept with great pleasure in bed.
16. Lords day. All the morning at my office with W. Hewer, there
drawing up my report to the Duke of York, as I have promised,
about the faults of this office, hoping therein to have opportunity of
93:7
doing myself [some good]. At noon to dinner; and again with him,
to work all the afternoon till night, till I was weary and had
despatched a good deal of business. And so to bed, after hearing my
wife readalittle.