1668-12-21

My owncoach carrying me and my boy Tom, who goes with
me in the room of W. Hewer who could not, and I dare not go
alone, to the Temple and there set me down — the first time my fine
horses ever carried me, and I am mighty proud of them; and there
took a hackney and to Whitehall, where a Committee of Tanger,
but little to do; and so away home, calling at the Exchange and
972
buying several little things; and so home and there dined with my
wife and people; and then she and W. Hewer and I by appointment
out with our coach, but the old horses, not daring yet to use them
too much, but only to enter them — and to the Temple, there to call
Talbt. Pepys; and took him up, and first went into Holborne and
there saw the woman that is to be seen with a Beard; she is a little
plain woman, a Dane, her name, Ursula Dyan, about forty years
old, her voice likealittle girl’s, with a beard as much as any man |
ever saw, as black almost, and grizzly. They offered [to] show my
wife further satisfaction if she desired it, refusing it to men that
desired it there — but there is no doubt but by her voice she is a
woman. It begun to grow at about seven years old—and was shaved
not above seven months ago, and is now so big as any man almost
that ever I saw, Isay, bushy and thick. It was a strange sight to me, I
confess, and what pleased me mightily. Thence to the Duke’s
playhouse and saw Mackbeth; the King and Court there, and we sat
just under them and my Lady Castlemayne, and close to the woman
that comes into the pit, a kind of a loose gossip, that pretends to be
like her, and isso something. And my wife, by my troth, appeared I
think as pretty as any of them, I never thought so much before; and
so did Talbot and W. Hewer, as they said, I heard, to one another.
The King and Duke of York minded me, and smiled upon me at the
handsome woman near me: but it vexed me to see Mall Davis, in
the box over his and my Lady Castlemaynes head, look down upon
the King and he up to her; and so did my Lady Castlemayne once, to
see who it was; but when she saw her, she blushed like fire; which
troubled me. The play done, took leave of Tall. who goes into the
country this Christmas; and so we home, and there I work at the
office late; and so home to supper and to bed.