1668-05-18

Up and to my office, where most of the morning doing
business and seeing my window-frames new painted; and then I out
by coach to my Lord Bellasses at his new house by my late Lord
Treasurer’s; and there met him and Mr. Sherwin, Auditor Beale,
and Creed about my Lord’s accounts; and here my Lord showed me
his new house, which endeed is mighty noble; and good pictures,
endeed not one bad one in it. Thence to my tailor’s, and there did
find Mercer come with Mrs. Horsfield and Gayet according to my
desire; and there I took them up, it being almost 12 a-clock or little
more, and carried them to the King’s playhouse, where the doors
were not then open; but presently they did open, and we in and find
many people already come in by private ways into the pit, it being
the first day of Sir Charles Sidly’s new play, so long expected, The
Mulbery guarden; of whom, being so reputed a wit, all the world
doth expect great matters. | having sat here a while and eat nothing
today, did slip out, getting a boy to keep my place; and to the Rose
tavern and there got halfa breast of mutton off of the spit and dined
all alone; and so to the play again, where the King and Queen by and
by came, and all the Court, and the house infinitely full. But the
play when it came, though there was here and there a pretty saying,
and that not very many neither, yet the whole of the play had
nothing extraordinary in it at all, neither of language nor design;
insomuch that the King I did not see laugh nor pleased the whole
play from the beginning to the end, nor the company; insomuch
that I have not been less pleased at a new play in my life] think. And
which made it the worse was that there never was worse music
played; that is, worse things composed; which made me and Capt.
Rolt, who happened to sit near me, mad. So away thence, very little
satisfied with the play, but pleased with my company: I carried
them to Kensington to the Grotto, and there we sang to my great
content; only, vexed in going in to see a son of Sir Heneage Finche’s
gI2
beating of a poor little dog to death, letting it lie in so much pain that
made me mad to see it; till by and by, the servants of the house
chiding of their young maister, one of them came with a thong and
killed the dog outright presently. Thence to Westminster Palace
and there took boat and to Foxhall, where we walked and eat and
drank and sang, and very merry; but I find Mrs. Horsfield one of
the veriest citizen’s wifes in the world, so full of little silly talk, and
now and thenalittle sillily bawdy, that Ibelieve ifyou had her sola,
a man might hazer algo with her. So back by water to Westminster
Palace and there got a coach who carried us as far as the Minorys,
and there something of the traces broke, and we forced to light and
walked to Mrs. Horsfields house, it being a long and bad way, and
dark; and having there put her in a-doors, her husband being in bed,
we left her; and so back to our coach, where the coachman had put it
in order, but could not find his whip in the dark a great while,
which made us stay long; at last, getting a neighbour to hold a
candle out of their window, Mercer found it, and so away; we
home at almost 12 at night; and setting them both at their homes, |
home and to bed.