1668-04-02

Up, after much pleasant talk with my wife and upon some
alterations Iwill make in my house in her absence, and Ido intend to
lay out some money thereon. So she and Iup, and she got her ready
to be gone; and by and by comes Betty Turner and her mother and
W. Batelier, and they and Deb, to whom I did give Ios. this
morning to oblige her to please her mistress (and yo did besar her
mucho) andalso Jane; and so in two coaches set out about 8 a-clock
toward the carrier, there for to take coach for my father’s (that is to
say, my wife and Betty Turner, Deb and Jane); but I meeting my
Lord Anglesy going to the office, was forced to light in Cheapside,
and there took my leave of them (not besando Deb, which yo had a
great mind to); left them to go to their coach, and I to the office,
where all the morning busy. And so at noon with my other clerks
(W. Hewer being a day’s journey with my wife) to dinner. Thence
with Lord Brouncker to the Royall Society, where they were just
done; but there I was forced to subscribe to the building of a
College, and did give 401. And several others did subscribe, some
greater and some less sums; but several Isaw hang off, and Idoubt it
will spoil the Society — for it breeds faction and ill will, and becomes
burdensome to some that cannot or would not do it. Here to my
great content Idid try the use of the Otacousticon, which was only a
great glass bottle broke at the bottom, putting the neck to my eare;
and there I did plainly hear the dashing of the oares of the boats in
the Thames to Arundell gallery window; which without it I could
not in the least do, and may Ibelieve be improved toa great heighth
— which I was mighty glad of. Thence with Lord Brouncker and
several of them to the King’s Head tavern by Chancery lane, and
there did drink and eat and talk; and above the rest, I did desire of
Mr. Hooke and my Lord an account of the reason of Concords and
Discords in music — which they say is from the zquality of the
vibrations; but I am not satisfied in it, but will at my leisure think of
it more and see how far that doth go to explain it.