1668-05-19

Up, and called on by Mr. Pierce, who tells me that after all this
ado Ward is come to town, and hath appeared to the Commis-
sioners of Accounts and given such answers as he thinks will do
everybody right and let the world see that their great expectations
and jealousies have been vain in this matter of the prizes. The
Commissioners were mighty inquisitive whether he was not
instructed by letters or otherwise from hence from my Lord
Sandwiches friends what to say and do, and perticularly from me -
which he did wholly deny, as it was true, I not knowing the man
that I know of. He tells me also that for certain Mr. Vaughan is
made Lord Chief Justice; which I am glad of. He tells me too, that
since my Lord of Ormond’s coming over, the King begins to be
mightily reclaimed, and sups every night with great pleasure with
the Queene; and yet it seems he is mighty hot upon the Duchess of
Richmond; insomuch that upon Sunday was sennit, at night, after
he had ordered his guards and coach to be ready to carry him to the
park, he did on a sudden take a pair of oars or sculler, and all alone,
or but one with him, go to Somerset house and there, the garden-
door not being open, himself clamber over the walls to make a visit
to her where she is; which is a horrid shame. He gone, Ito the office,
where we sat all the morning. Sir W. Pen, sick of the gout, comes
913
not out. After dinner at home, to Whitehall, it being a very rainy
day. And there a Committee for Tanger, where I was mightily
pleased to see Sir W. Coventry fall upon my Lord Bellasses’s
business of the 3d. in every piece of eight, which he would get to
himself, making the King pay 4s.-9d. while he puts them off for
4s.-6d. — so that Sir W. Coventry continues still the same man for
the King’s good. But here Creed did vex me with saying that Iought
first to have my account passed by the Commissioners of Tanger
before in the Exchequer. Thence, W. Coventry and I in the Matted
Gallery to talk; and there he did talk very well to me about the way
to save the credit of the Officers of the Navy, and their places too, by
making use of this intervall of Parliament to be found to be mending
of matters in the Navy, and that nothing but this will do it; and gives
an instance in themselfs of the Treasury, whereof himself andSirJo.
Duncome all the world knows have enemies, and my Lord Ashly a
man obnoxious to most, and Sir Tho. Clifford one that, as a man
suddenly rising anda creature of my Lord Arlington’s, hath enemies
enough (none of them being otherwise but the Duke of Albemarle);
yet with all this fault, they hear nothing of the business of the
Treasury, but all well spoken of there. He is for the removal ofSirJ.
Mennes, thinking that thereby the world will see a greater change in
the hands then now they do. And Iwill endeavour it, and endeavour
to do some good in the office also. So home by coach and to the
office, where ended my letters and then home; and there got Balty to
read to me out of Sorbiere’s observations in his voyage into
England; and then to bed.