1668-05-20

. Up and with Coll. Middleton in a new coach he hath made
him, very handsome, to Whitehall; where the Duke of York having
removed his lodgings for this year to St. James’s, we walked thither
and there firid the Duke of York coming to Whitehall; and so back
to the Council chamber, where the Committee of the Navy sat, and
here we discoursed several things; but Lord, like fools, so as it was a
shame to see things of this importance managed by a Council that
understand nothing of them. And among other things, one was
about this building of a ship with Hemskirkes secret, to sail a third
faster than any other ship; but he hath got Prince Rupart on his side,
and by that means I believe will get his conditions made better then
he would otherwise, or ought endeed. Having done there, I met
with Sir Rd. Browne and he took me to dinner with him to a new
tavern above Charing cross, where some Clients of his did give him
914
a good dinner, and good company; among others, one Bovy, a
solicitor* and lawyer and merchant all together, who hath travelled
very much, did talk some things well, but only he is a Sir Positive;
but the talk of their travels over the Alps very fine. Thence walked
to the King’s playhouse and there saw The Mulbery-Garden again;
and cannot be reconciled to it, but only do find here and there an
independent sentence of wit, and that is all. Here met with Creed
and took him to Hales’s, and there saw the beginnings of Harris’s
head which he draws for me and which I do not yet like. So he and I
down to the New Exchange and there cheapened ribbands for my
wife, and so down to the Wheyhouse and drank some and eat some
curds, which did by and by make my belly ake mightily. So he and I
to Whitehall and walked over the park to the Mulbery garden,
where I never was before; and find it a very silly place, worse then
Spring garden, and but little company and those a rascally,
whoring, roguing sort of people; only, a wilderness here is that is
somewhat pretty, but rude. Did not stay to drink, but walked an
hour, and so away to Charing cross and there took coach and away
home — in my way going into Bishopsgate street to bespeak places
for myself and boy to go to Cambridge in the coach this week, and
so to Brampton to see my wife. So home and to supper and to bed.