1668-10-25

Lords day. Up, and discoursing with my wife about our house
and many new things we are doing of; and so to church I, and there
find Jack Fen come, and his wife, a pretty black woman; Inever saw
her before, nor took notice of her now. So home and to dinner; and
after dinner, all the afternoon got my wife and boy to read to me.
And at night W. Batelier comes and sups with us; and after supper,
to have my head combed by Deb, which occasioned the greatest
sorrow to me that ever I knew in this world; for my wife, coming
up suddenly, did find me imbracing the girl con my hand sub su
coats; and endeed, I was with my main in her cunny. I was at a
wonderful loss upon it, and the girl also; and Iendeavoured to put it
off, but my wife was struck mute and grew angry, and as her voice
came to her, grew quite out of order; and I do say little, but to bed;
and my wife said little also, but could not sleep all night; but about 2
in the morning waked me and cried, and fell to tell me as a great
secret that she was a Roman Catholique and had received the Holy
Sacrament; which troubled me but I took no notice of it, but she
went on from one thing to another, till at last it appeared plainly her
trouble was at what she saw; but yet I did not know how much she
saw and therefore said nothing to her. But after her much crying
and reproaching me with inconstancy and preferring a sorry girl
before her, I did give her no provocations but did promise all fair
usage to her, and love, and foreswore any hurt that I did with her —
till at last she seemed to be at ease again; and so toward morning, a
little sleep; and so I, with some little repose and rest, rose, and
up and by water to Whitehall, but with my mind mightily
troubled for the poor girl, whom I
fear I have undone by this, my
[wife] telling me that she would turn her out of door. However, I
was obliged to attend the Duke of York, thinking to have had a
meeing of Tanger today, but had not; but he did take me and Mr.
Wren into his closet, and there did press me to prepare what Ihad to
say upon the answers of my fellow-officers to his great letter; which
I promised to do against his coming to town again the next week;
and so to other discourse, finding plainly that he is in trouble and
apprehensions of the reformers, and would be found to do what he
950
can towards reforming himself.
And so thence to my Lord Sandwich; where after long stay, he
being in talk with others privately, I to him; and there he taking
physic and keeping his chamber, I had an hour’s talk with him
about the ill posture of things at this time, while the King gives
countenance to Sir Ch. Sidly and Lord Buckhurst, telling him their
late story of running up and down the streets a little while since all
night, and their being beaten and clapped up all the night by the
constable, who is since chid and imprisoned for his pains. He tells
me that he thinks his matters do stand well with the King — and
hopes to have despatch to his mind; but I doubt it, and do see that he
doth fear it too. He told me my Lady Carteret’s trouble about my
writing of that letter of the Duke of York’s lately to the office;
which I did not own, but declared to be of no injury to G. Carteret,
and that I would writealetter to him to satisfy him therein. But this
Iam in pain how to do without doing myself wrong, and the end I
had, of preparing a justification to myself hereafter, when the faults
of the Navy come to be found out. However, I will do it in the best
manner I can. Thence by coach home and to dinner, finding my
wife mightily discontented and the girl sad, and no words from my
wife to her. So after dinner, they out with me about two or three
things; and so home again, I all the evening busy and my wife full of
trouble in her looks; and anon to bed — where about midnight, she
wakes me and there falls foul on me again, affirming that she saw
me hug and kiss the girl; the latter I denied, and truly; the other I
confessed and no more. And upon her pressing me, did offer to give
her under my hand that I would never see Mrs. Pierce more, nor
Knepp, but did promise her perticular demonstrations of my true
love to her, owning some indiscretion in what I did, but that there
was no harm in it. She at last on these promises was quiet, and very
kind we were, and so to sleep; and in the morning up, but with
27 my mind troubled for the poor girl, with whom Icould not get
opportunity to speak; but to the office, my mind mighty full of
sorrow for her, where all the morning, and to dinner with my
people and to the’office all the afternoon; and so at night home and
there busy to get some things ready against tomorrow’s meeting of
Tanger; and that being done and my clerks gone, my wife did
towards bedtime begin to be in a mighty rage from some new
matter that she had got in her head, and did most part of the night in
bed rant at me in most high terms, of threats of publishing my
shame; and when I offered to rise, would have rose too, and caused
951
a candle to be lit, to burn by her all night in the chimney while she
ranted; while [I], that knew myself to have given some grounds for
it, did make it my business to appease her all I could possibly, and
by good words and fair promises did make her very quiet; and so
rested all night and rose with perfect good peace, being heartily
afflicted for this folly of mine that did occasion it; but was forced to
be silent about the girl, which I have no mind to part with, but
much less that the poor girl should be undone by my folly. So
up, with mighty kindness from my wife and a thorough peace;
and being up, did by a note advise the girl what I had done and
owned, which note I was in pain for till she told me that she had
burned it.
So by coach with Mr. Gibson to Chancery lane, and there made
oath before a Maister of Chancery to my Tanger account of Fees;
and so to Whitehall, where by and by a Committee met; my Lord
Sandwich there, but his report was not received, it being late; but
only a little business done, about the supplying the place with
victuals; but I did get, to my great content, my account allowed of
Fees, with great applause by my Lord Ashly and Sir W. Penn.
Thence home, calling at one or two places, and there about our
workmen, who are at work upon my wife’s closet and other parts
of my house, that we are all in dirt. So after dinner, with Mr.
Gibson all the afternoon in my closet; and at night to supper and to
bed, my wife and I at good peace, but yet some little grudgeings of
trouble in her, and more in me, about the poor girl.