1668-06-15

Monday. Up, and with Mr. Butts to look into the Baths, and
find the King and Queen’s full ofamixed sort, of good and bad, and
the Cross only almost for the gentry. So home and did the like with
my wife, and did pay my guides, two women, §s.; one man, 2s. 6d.;
poor 6d.; woman to lay my foot-cloth, 1s. So to our Inne, and there
eat and paid reckoning, 1/ 8s. 6d.; servants, 35.; poor, Is.; lent the
coachman, 10s. Before I took coach, I went to make a boy dive in
the King’s bath, 1s. I paid also for my coach and a horse to Bristol,
11 1s. 6d. Took coach, and away, without any of the company ofthe
other stage-coaches that go out of this town to-day; and rode all day
with some trouble, for fear of being out of our way, over the
downes, where the life of the shepherds is, in fair weather only,
pretty. In the afternoon came to Abebury, where, seeing great
stones like those of Stonage standing up, I stepped, and took a
countryman of that town, and he carried me and shewed meaplace
trenched in, like Old Sarum almost, with great stones pitched in it,
some bigger than those at Stonage in figure, to my great
admiration: and he told me that most people of learning, coming
by, do come and view them, and that the King did so: and that the
Mount cast hard by is called Selbury, from one King Seale buried
there, as tradition says. I did give this man 1s. So took coach again,
(seeing one place with great high stones pitched round, which, I
believe, was once some particular building, in some measure like
that of Stonag). But, about a mile on, it was prodigious to see how
full the downes are of great stones; and all along the valleys, stones
of considerable bigness, most of them growing certainly out of the
ground so thick as to cover the ground, which makes me think the
less of the wonder of Stonage, for hence they might undoubtedly
supply themselves with stones, as well as those at Abebery. In my
way did give to the poor and menders of the highway 3s. Before
night come to Marlborough, and lay at the Hart; a good house, and
a pretty fair town for a street or two; and what is most singular is
their houses on one side having their penthouses supported with
pillars, which makes it a good walk. My wife pleased with all, this
evening reading of Mustapha to me till supper, and then to supper,
and had music whose innocence pleased me, and I did give them 3s.
So to bed and lay well all night, and long, so as all the five coaches
that come this day from Bath, as well as we, were gone out of the
town before us.
927