1668-11-18

Lay long in bed, talking with my wife, she being unwilling to
have me go abroad, being and declaring herself jealous of my going
out, for fear of my going to Deb; which I do deny — for which God
forgive me, for I was no sooner out about noon but I did go by
coach directly to Somerset house and there enquired among the
porters there for Dr. Allbun; and the first I spoke with told me he
knew him, and that he was newly gone into Lincoln’s Inn fields, but
whither he could not tell me, but that one of his fellows, not then in
the way, did carry a chest of drawers thither with him, and that
when he comes he would ask him. This put me in some hopes; and I
to Whitehall and thence to Mr. Povy’s, but he at dinner; and
therefore I away and walked up and down the Strand between the
two turnstiles, hoping to see her out of a window; and then
imployed a porter, one Osbeston, to find out this Doctors lodgings
thereabouts; who by appointment comes to me to Hercules pillars,
where I dined alone, but tells me that he cannot find out any such
but will enquire further. Thence back to Whitehall to the Treasury a
while, and thence to the Strand; and towards night did meet with
the porter that carried the chest of drawers with this Doctor, but he
would not tell me where he lived, being his good maister he told
me; but if I would have a message to him, he would deliver it. At
last, I told him my business was not with him, but a little
gent{le]}woman, one Mrs. Willet, that is with him; and sent him to
see how she did, from her friend in London, and no other token. He
goes while I walk in Somerset house — walk there in the Court; at
962
last he comes back and tells me she is well, and that I may see her ifI
will — but no more. So I could not be commanded by my reason,
but I must go this very night; and so by coach, it being now dark, I
to her, close by my tailor’s; and there she came into the coach to me,
and yo did besar her and tocar her thing, but ella was against it and
laboured with much earnestness, such as I believed to be real; and
yet at last yo did make her tener mi cosa in her mano, while mi
mano was sobra her pectus, and so did hazer with grand delight. I
did nevertheless give her the best counsel I could, to have a care of
her honour and to fear God and suffer no man para haver to do con
her — as yo have done — which she promised. Yo did give her 20s.
and directions para laisser sealed in paper at any time the name of the
place of her being, at Herringman’s my bookseller in the Change —
by which I might go para her. And so bid her good-night, with
much content to my mind and resolution to look after her no more
till I heard from her. And so home, and there told my wife a fair
tale, God knows, how I spent the whole day; with which the poor
wretch was satisfied, or at least seemed so; and so to supper and to
bed, she having been mighty busy all day in getting of her house in
order against tomorrow, to hang up our new hangings and
furnishing our best chamber.