1668-03-28

Up and to the office, where all the morning doing business;
and after dinner with Sir W. Penn to Whitehall, where we and the
rest of us presented a great letter of the state of our want of money to
his Royal Highness. I did also present a demand of mine for
consideration for my travelling charges of coach and boat hire
during the war — which though his Royal Highness and the
company did all like of, yet contrary to my expectationIfind him so
Jealous now of doing anything extraordinary, that he desired the
gentlemen that they would consider it and report their minds in it to
him. This did unsettle my mind a great while, not expecting this
stop: but however, I shall do as well I know, though it causes me a
little stop. But that that troubles me most is that while we were thus
together with the Duke of York, comes in Mr. Wren from the
House, where he tells us another storm hath been all this day almost
against the Officers of the Navy upon this complaint: that though
they have made good rules for payment of tickets, yet they have not
observed them themselfs; which was driven so high as to have it
urged that we should presently be put out of our places—and so they
have at last ordered that we be heard at the bar of the House upon
this business on Thursdy next.
882
1—4 March - 1668
—*MARCH2-
1. Lords day. Up very betimes and by coach to Sir W. Coventry,
and there, largely carrying with me all my notes and papers, did run
over our whole defence in the business of Tickets, in order to the
answering the House on Thursday next; and I do think, unless they
be set without reason to ruin us, we shall make a good defence. I
find him in great anxiety, though he will not discover it, in the
business of the proceedings of Parliament; and would as little as is
possible have his name mentioned in our discourses to them, and
perticularly the business of selling places is now upon his hand to
defend himself in — wherein I did help him in his defence about the
Flaggmaker’s place which is named in the House. We did here do
the like about the complaint of want of victuals in the fleet in the
year 1666, which will lie upon me to defend also; so that my head is
full of care and weariness in my imployment. Thence home; and
there, my mind beingalittle lightened by my morning’s work in
the arguments I have now laid together in better method for our
defence to the Parliament, I to talk with my wife; and in lieu of a
Coach this year, I have got my wife to be contented with her closet
being made up this summer and going into the country this
summer for a month or two to my father’s, and there Mercer and
Deb and Jane shall go with them; which [I] the rather do for the
entertaining my wife, and preventing of fallings-out between her
and my father or Deb — which uses to be the fate of her going into
the country.
4-5. Up betimes and with Sir W. Penn in his coach to Whitehall,
there to wait upon the Duke of York and the Commissioners of the
Treasury, W. Coventry and Sir Jo. Duncombe — who do declare
that they cannot find the money we demand; and we, that less then
what we demand will not set out the fleet intended; and so broke up
with no other conclusion then that they would let us have what they
could get, and we would improve that as well as we could. So God
bless us and prepare us against the consequences of these matters.
Thence, it being a cold wet day, I home with Sir
J.Mennes in his
coach, and called by the way at my bookseller’s and took home
with me Kercher’s Musica, very well bound. But I had no comfort
to look upon them, but as soon as I came home fell to my work at
the office, shutting the doors that we, I and my clerks, might not be
interrupted; and so, only with room fora little dinner, we very busy
883
all the day till night, that the officers met for me to give them the
heads of what I intended to say; which I did, with great discontent
to see them all rely on me that have no reason at all to trouble myself
about it, nor have any thanks from them for my labour; but
contrarily, Brouncker looked mighty dogged, as thinking that
I did
not intend to do it so as to save him. This troubled me so much, as
together with the shortness of the time, and muchness of the
business, did let me be at it till but about 10 at night; and then, quite
weary and dull and vexed, I could go no further, but resolved to
leave the rest to tomorrow morning; and so in full discontent and
weariness did give over and went home, with[out] supper vexed
and sickish, to bed — and there slept about three hours; but then
waked, and never in so much trouble in all my life of mind,
thinking of the task I have upon me, and upon what dissatisfactory
grounds, and what the issue of it may be to me. With these thoughts
I lay troubling myself till 6 a-clock, restless, and at last getting my
wife to talk to me to comfort me; which she at last did, and made me
resolve to quit my hands of this office and endure the trouble [of] it
no longer then till I can clear myself of it. So, with great trouble but
yet with some ease from this discourse with my wife, I up and to
my office, whither came my clerks; and so I did huddle up the best I
could some more notes for my discourse today; and by 9 a-clock
was ready and did go down to the Old Swan, and there by boat,
with T. Hater and W. Hewer with me, to Wesminster, where I
found myself come time enough and my Brethren all ready. But I
full of thoughts and trouble touching the issue of this day; and to
comfort myself did go to the Dogg and drink half a pint of mulled
sack, and in the Hall did drink a dram of brandy at Mrs. Howletts,
and with the warmth of this did find myself in better order as to
courage, truly.
So we all up to the Lobby; and between 11 and 12 a-clock were
called in, with the Mace before us, into the House; where a mighty
full House, and we stood at the Barr - viz., Brouncker, Sir J.
Mennes, Sir T. Harvey and myself— W. Penn being in the House as
a Member. I perceive the whole House was full, and full of
expectation of our defence what it would be, and with great
prejudice. After the Speaker had told us the dissatisfaction of the
House, and read the report of the Committee, I begin our defence
most acceptably and smoothly, and continued at it without any
hesitation or losse but with full scope and all my reason free about
me, as ifit had been at my own table, from that time till past 3 in the
884
afternoon; and so ended without any interruption from the
Speaker, but we withdrew. And there all my fellow-officers, and all
the world that was within hearing, did congratulate me and cry up
my speech as the best thing they ever heard, and my fellow-officers
overjoyed in it. We were called in again by and by to answer only
one question, touching our paying tickets to ticket-mongers — and
so out; and we were in hopes to have had a vote this day in our
favour, and so the generality of the House was; but my speech being
so long, many had gone out to dinner and come in again half drunk,
and then there are two or three that are professed enemies to us and
everybody else; among others, Sir T. Littleton, Sir Tho. Lee, Mr.
Wiles (the coxcomb whomI saw heretofore at the cockfighting)
and a few others; I saw these did rise up and speak against the
coming to a vote now, the House not being full, by reason of
several being at dinner but most because that the House was to
attend the King this afternoon about the business of Religion
(wherein they pray him to put in force all the laws against
nonconformists and papists); and this prevented it, so that they put
it off to tomorrow come sennit. However, it is plain we have got
great ground; and everybody says I have got the most honour that
any could have had opportunity of getting. And so, with our hearts
mightily overjoyed at this success, we all to dinner to Lord
Brouncker; that is to say, myself, T. Harvey, and W. Penn, and
there dined; and thence with Sir Anth. Morgan, who is an
acquaintance of Brouncker’s, a very wise man, we after dinner to
the King’s House and there saw part of The Discontented Colonell —
but could take no great pleasure in it because of our coming in the
middle of it. After the play, home with W. Penn and there to my
wife, whom W. Hewer had told of my success; and she overjoyed,
and I also as to my perticular. And after talking awhile, Ibetimes to
bed, having had no quiet rest a good while.