1668-01-21

Up, and while at the office comes news fromKate Joyce that if
I would see her hus[band] alive, I must come presently; so after the
office was up, I to him, and W. Hewer with me, and find him in his
sick bed (Inever was at their house, this Inne, before), very sensible
in discourse and thankful for my kindnesses to him; but his breath
rattled in his throate and they did lay pigeons to his feet while I was
in the house; and all despair of him, and with good reason. But the
sorrow is that it seems on Thursday last he went sober and quiet out
of doors in the morning to Islington, and behind one of the Inns, the
White Lion, did fling himself into a pond — was spied by a poor
woman and got out by some people binding up Hay ina barn there,
and set on his head and got to life; and known by a woman coming
that way, and so his wife and friends sent for. He confessed his
doing the thing, being led by the Devil; and doth declare his reason
to be his trouble that he found in having forgot to serve God as he
ought since he came to this new imployment; and Ibelieve that, and
the sense of his great loss by the fire, did bring him to it, and so
everybody concludes. He stayed there all that night, and came
home by coach next morning; and there grew sick, and worse and
worse to this day. I stayed a while among the friends that were
there; and they being now in fear that the goods and estate would be
seized on, though he lived all this while, because of his endeavour-
ing to drown himself,’ my cousin did endeavour to remove what
she could of plate out of the house, and desired me to take [her]
flagons; which I was glad of, and did take them away with me, in
great fear all the way of being seized; though there was no reason for
it, he not being dead; but yet so fearful I was. So home and there eat
my dinner, and busy all the afternoon, and troubled at this business.
In the evening, with Sir D. Gawden to Guildhall to advise with the
Towne Clerke about the practice of the City and nation in this case,
and he thinks it cannot be found Selfe-murder; but if it be, it will
fall, all the estate, to the King. So we parted, and I to my cousin’s
1. Until 1870 the property of suicides was forfeit to the Crown.
867
again; where I no sooner came but news was brought down from
his chamber that he was departed. So at their entreaty I presently
took coach and to Whitehall, and there find W. Coventry and he
carried me to the King, the Duke of York being with him, and there
told my story which Ihad told him; and the King without more ado
granted that ifit was found [self-murder] the estate should be to the
widow and children. I presently to each Secretary’s office and there
left Caveats, and so away back again to my cousin’s — leaving a
Chimny on fire at Whitehall in the King’s closet, but no danger.
And so when I came thither, I found her all in sorrow, but she and
the rest mightily pleased with my doing this for them; and endeed,
it was a very great courtesy, for people are looking out for the
estate, and the Coroner will be sent to and a jury called to examine
his death. This being well done, to my and their great joy, I home
and there to my office; and so to supper and to bed.