1668-11-09

Up, andIdid, bya little note which I flung to Deb, advise her
958
g—10 November 1668
that I did continue to deny that ever I kissed her, and so she might
govern herself. The truth [is], that I did adventure upon God’s
pardoning me this lie, knowing how heavy a thing it would be for
me to be the ruin of the poor girl; and next, knowing that ifmy wife
should know all, it were impossible ever for her to be at peace with
me again — and so our whole lives would be uncomfortable. The
girl read, and as I bid her, returned me the note, flinging it to me in
passing by. And so I abroad by [coach] to Whitehall, and there to
the Duke of Yorke’s to wait on him.
10. Up, and my wife still every day as ill as she is all night; will rise
to see me out doors, telling me plainly that she dares not let me see
the girl; and so I out to the office, where all the morning; and so
home to dinner, where I find my wife mightily troubled again,
more then ever, and she tells me that it is from her examining the
girl and getting a confession now from her of all, even to the very
tocando su thing with my hand — which doth mightily trouble me,
as not being able to foresee the consequences of it as to our future
peace together. So my wife would not go down to dinner, but I
would dine in her chamber with her; and there, after mollifying her
as much as I could, we were pretty quiet and eat; and by and by
comes Mr. Hollier, and dines there by himself after we had dined.
And he being gone, we to talk again, and she to be troubled,
reproaching me with my unkindness and perjury, I having denied
my ever kissing her —as also with all her old kindnesses to me, and
my ill-using of her from the beginning, and the many temptations
she hath refused out of faithfulness to me; whereof several she was
perticular in, and especially from my Lord Sandwich by the
sollicitation of Capt. Ferrer; and then afterward, the courtship of
my Lord Hinchingbrooke, even to the trouble of his Lady. All
which I did acknowledge and was troubled for, and wept; and at last
pretty good friends again, and so] to my office and there late, and so
home to supper with her; and so to bed, where after half-an-hour’s
slumber, she wakes me and cries out that she should never sleep
more, and so kept raving till past midnight, that made me cry and
weep heartily all the while for her, and troubled for what she
reproached me with as before; and at last, with new vows, and
perticularly that I would myself bid the girl be gone and show my
dislike to her — which I shall endeavour to perform, but with much
trouble. And so, this appeasing her, we to sleep as well as we could
till morning.
52