1668-03-26

Up betimes to the office, where by and by my Lord
Brouncker and I met and made an endof our business betimes; so I
away with him to Mrs. Williams’s and there dined, and thence I
alone to the Duke of York’s House to see the new play called The
Man is the Maister, where the house was, it being not above one a-
clock, very full; but my wife and Deb being there before with Mrs.
Pierce and Corbett and Betty Turner, whom my wife carried with
her, they made me room; and there I
sat, it costing me 8s. upon
them in oranges, at 6d. apiece. By and by the King came and we sat
- just under him, so that I durst not turn my back all the play. The
play is a translation out of French, and the plot Spanish; but not
anything extraordinary at all in it, though translated by Sir W.
Davenant; and so I found the King and his company did think
meanly of it, though there was here and there something pretty; but
the most of the mirth was sorry, poor stuffe, of eating of sack-
posset and slabbering themselfs, and mirth fit for Clownes. The
prologue but poor; and the epilogue, little in it but the extraordi-
nariness of it, it being sung by Harris and another in the form of a
ballet. Thence by agreement, we all of us to the Blue Balls hard by,
whither Mr. Pierce also goes with us, who met us at the play; and
anon comes Manuel and his wife and Knipp and Harris, who brings
with him Mr. Banester, the great maister of Musique. And after
much difficulty in getting of Musique, we to dancing and then to a
supper of some French dishes (which yet did not please me) and
then to dance and sing; and mighty merry we were till about 11 or
895
12 at night, with mighty great content in all my company; andIdid,
as Ilove to do, enjoy myself in my pleasure, as being the heighth of
what we take pains for and can hope for in this world — and
therefore to be enjoyed while we are young and capable of these
joys. My wife extraordinary fine today in her Flower tabby suit,
bought a year and more ago, before my mother’s death put her into
mourning, and so not worn till this day — and everybody in love
with it; and endeed, she is very fine and handsome in it. I having
paid the reckoning, which came to almost 4l, we parted: my
company and Wm. Batelier, who was also with us, home ina coach
round by the Wall, where we met so many stops by the Waches that
it cost us much time and some trouble, and more money to every
watch to them to drink — this being encreased by the trouble the
prentices did lately give the City, so that the militia and watches are
very strict at this time; and we had like to have met witha stop for
all night at the Constables watch at Mooregate, by a pragmatical
Constable. But we came well home at about 2 in the morning, and
so to bed.