1668-11-31

Soends this month, with some quiet to my mind, though not
perfect, after the greatest falling out with my poor wife, and
through my folly with the girl, that ever I had; and I have reason to
953
1668 31 October—2 November
be sorry and ashamed of it — and more, to be troubled for the poor
girl’s sake; whomI fear I shall by this means prove the ruin of —
thoughI shall think myself concerned both to love and be a friend to
her. This day, Rogr. Pepys and his son Talbot, newly come to
town, came and dined with me, and mighty glad I am to see them.
—*NOVEMBER23-
1. Lords day. Up, and with W. Hewers at my chamber all this
morning, going further in my great business for the Duke of York;
and so at noon to dinner, and then W. Hewer to write fair what he
had writ, and my wife to read to me all the afternoon; till anon Mr.
Gibson came, and he andI to perfect it to my full mind. And so to
supper and to bed — my mind yet at disquiet that I cannot be
informed how poor Deb stands with her mistress, but Ifear she will
put her away; and the truth is, though it be much against my mind
and to my trouble, yet I think it will be fit that she be gone, for my
wife’s peace and mine; for she cannot but be offended at the sight of
her, my wife having conceived this jealousy of me with reason.
And therefore, for that , and other reasons of expense, it will be best
for me to let her go — but I shall love and pity her. This noon Mr.
Povy sent his Coach for my wife and I to see; which we like
mightily, and will endeavour to have him get us just such another.
2. Up, anda cold morning, by water through bridge without a
cloak; and there to Mr. Wren at his chamber at Whitehall, the first
time of his coming thither this year, the Duchess coming thither
tonight. And there he and I did read over my paper that Ihave with
so much labour drawn up about the several answers of the Officers
of this office to the Duke of York’s reflections, and did debatea
little
what advice to give the Duke of York when he comes to town upon
it. Here came in Lord Anglesy, and I perceive he makes nothing of
this order for his suspension, resolving to contend and to bring it to
the Council on Wednesday when the King is come to town
tomorrow. And Mr. Wren doth join with him mightily in it, and
doth look upon the Duke of York as concerned more in it then he.
So I to visit Creed at his chamber, but his wife not come thither yet;
nor doth he tell me where she is, though she be in town at Stepny, at
Atkins’s. So to Mr. Povy’s to talk about a coach, but there I find my
954
Lord Sandwich and Peterborough and Hinchingbrooke, Ch.
Herbert and Sidny Mountagu; and there I was stopped, and dined
mighty nobly at a little table, with one little dish at a time upon it —
but mighty merry; I was glad to see it, but sorry, methought, to see
my Lord hath so little reason to be merry, and yet glad for his sake
to have him cheerful. After dinner, up, and looked up and down the
house, and so to the cellar and thence I slipped away without taking
leave; and so to a few places about business; and among others, to
my bookseller’s in Duck lane; and so home, where the house still
full of dirt by painters and others, and will not be clean a good
while. This day I went by Mr. Povy’s direction to a coachmaker
near him for a coach just like his, but it was sold this very morning.