1668-05-24

Lords day. | up at between 2 and 3 in the morning; and calling
up my boy and father’s boy, we set out by 3 a-clock, it being high
day; and so through the waters with very good success, though
very deep almost all the way, and got to Brampton about [blank],
where most of them in bed; and so I weary up to my wife’s
chamber, whomIfind in bed and pretended a
little not well, and
endeed she hath those upon her, but fell to talk and mightily pleased
both of us; and up got the rest, Betty Turner and Willet and Jane, all
whomI was glad to see, and very merry; and got me ready in my
new stuff clothes that I sent down before me; and so my wife and
they got ready too, while I to my father, poor man, and walked
with him up and down the house, it raininga
little — and the waters
all over Portholme and the meadows — so as no pleasure abroad.
Here I saw my brothers and sister Jackson, she growing fat, and
since being married, I think looks comelier then before. But a
mighty pert woman she is, and I think proud, he keeping her
mighty handsome, and they say mighty fond — and are going
shortly to live at Ellington of themselfs, and will keep malting and
grazing of cattle. Atnoon comes Mr. Phillips and dines with us, and
a pretty odd-humoured man he seems to be — but good withal, but
of mighty great methods in his eating and drinking, and will not
kiss a woman since his wife’s death. After dinner, my Lady
Sandwich sending to see whether I was come, I presently took
horse and find her and her family at chapel; and thither I went in to
them and sat out the sermon, where I heard Jervas Fullwood, now
their chaplain, preach a very good and seraphic kind of sermon, too
good for an ordinary congregation. After sermon, I with my Lady
and my Lady Hinchingbrooke and Paulina and Lord Hinch-
ingbrooke to the dining-room, saluting none of them, and there sat
and talked an hour or two, with great pleasure and satisfaction, to
my Lady about my Lord’s matters; but I think not with that
satisfaction to her or me that otherwise would, she knowing that
she did design to borrow, and I remaining all the while in fear of
being asked to lend her some money, as Iwas afterward (when Ihad
916
taken leave of her) by Mr. Sheply, rool; which I will not deny my
Lady, and am willing to be found when my Lord comes home to
have done something of that kind for them. And so he riding to
Brampton and supping there with me, he did desire it of me from
my Lady; and I promised it, though much against my will, for Ifear
it is as good as lost. After supper, where very merry, we to bed,
myself very weary, and to sleep all night.