1668-02-07

Up, and to the office to the getting of my books in order to
carry to the Commissioners of Accounts this morning. This being
done, I away, first to Westminster hall and there met my Cosen
Rogr. Pepys by his desire (the first time I have seen him since his
coming to town, the Parliament meeting yesterday and adjurned to
Monday next); and here he tells me that Mr. Jackson, my sister’s
servant, is come to town. Thence Ito the Comissioners of Accounts
and there presented my books, and was made to sit down and used
with much respect, otherwise then the other day when I came to
them as aCriminall about the business of the prizes. I sat here with
thei a great while, while my books were inventoried; and here do
hear from them by discourse that they are like to undo the
Treasurer’s instruments of the Navy by making it a rule that they
shall repay all money paid to wrong parties; which is a thing not to
be supported by these poor creatures, the Treasurer’s instruments;
as it is also hard for seamen to be ruined by their paying money to
whom they please. I know not what will be the issue of it. I find
these gentlemen to sit all day and only eat a bit of bread at noon and
a glass of wine; and are resolved to go through their business with
great severity and method. Thence Jabout 2 a-clock to Westminster
hall by appointment, and there met my cousin Roger again and Mr.
Jackson, who is a plain young man, handsome enough for her; one
of no education nor discourse, but of few words, and one altogether
that I think will please me well enough. My cousin hath got me to
give the od sixth, 100/, presently, which I intended to keep to the
birth of the first child: and let it go, I shall be eased of that care; and
so after little talk we parted, resolving to dine all together at my
house tomorrow. So there parted, my mind pretty well satisfied
with this plain fellow for my sister, though I shall I see have no
pleasure nor content in him, as ifhe had been a man of breeding and
parts like Cumberland.