1668-03-14

Up very betimes, andwith Jane to Levetts, there to conclude
888
14-15 March 1668 |
upon our dinner; and thence to the pewterers to buy a pewter
Sestorne, which I have ever hitherto been without. And so up and
down upon several occasions to set matters in order. And that being
done, I out of doors to Westminster hall and there met my Lord
Brouncker, who tells me that our business is put off till Monday,
and so Iwas mighty glad that I was eased of my attendance here and
of any occasion that might put me out of humour, as it is likely ifwe
had been called before the Parliament. Therefore, after having
spoke with Mr. Godolphin and Cosen Roger, I away home and
there do find everything in mighty good order; only, my wife not
dressed, which troubles me. Anon comes my company, viz., my
Lord Hinchingbrooke and his Lady, Sir Ph. Carteret and his Lady,
Godolphin and my Cosen Roger, and Creed, and mighty merry;
and by and by to dinner, which was very good and plentiful (I
should have said, and Mr. George Mountagu, who came at a very
little warning, which was exceeding kind of him): and there among
other things, my Lord had Sir Samuel Morland’s late invention for
casting up sums of olos.od.; which is very pretty, but not very
useful. Most of our discourse was of my Lord Sandwich and his
family, as being all of us of that family; and with extraordinary
pleasure all the afternoon thus together, eating and looking over my
closet: and my Lady Hinchingbrooke I find a very sweet-natured
and well-disposed lady, a lover of books and pictures and of good
understanding. About 5 a-clock they went, and then my wife andI
abroad by coach into Moorefields, only fora little ayre; and so
home again, staying nowhere, and then up to her chamber, there to
talk with pleasure of this day’s passages, and so to bed.
15. Lords day. To Whitehall and there walked with this man and that
man till chapel done and the King dined; and then Sir Tho. Clifford
the Controller took me with him to dinner to his lodgings, where
my Lord Arlington anda great deal of good and great company —
where Ivery civilly used by them —and had a most excellent dinner.
And good discourse of Spain, Mr. Godolphin being there —
perticularly of the removal of the bodies of all the dead Kings of
Spain that could be got together, and brought to the Pantheon at the
Escuriall (when it was finished) and there placed before the Alter,
there to lie for ever. And there was a sermon made to them upon
this text, Arida ossa, audite verbum dei — a most eloquent sermon as
they say who say they have read it. After dinner, away thence; andI
to Mrs. Martin’s and there spent the afternoon and did hazer con
889
ella; and here was her sister and Mrs. Burrows; and so in the
evening got a coach and home, and there find Mr. Pelling and W.
Hewer, and there talked and supped (Pelling being gone); and
mightily pleased with a picture that W. Hewer brought hither of
several things painted upon a deal Board, which board is so well
painted that in my whole life I never was so pleased or surprized
with any picture, and so troubled that so good pictures should be
painted upon a piece of bad deale; even after I knew that it was not
board, but only the picture of a board, I could not remove my
fancy. After supper to bed, being very sleepy and, I bless God, my
mind at very good present rest.