1668-04-31

Up pretty betimes and to the office, where we sat all the
morning; and at noon I home to dinner, where my Uncle Tho.
dined with me, as he doth every quarter, and I paid him his
pension; and also comes Mr. Hollier, alittle fuddled and so did talk
nothing but Latin and laugh, that it was very good sport to see a
sober man in such a humour, though he was not drunk to scandal.
At dinner comes a summons for this office to attend a committee
of Parliament this afternoon with Sir D. Gawden, which I
accordingly did, with my papers relating to the sending of victuals
to Sir Jo. Harman’s fleet; and there, Sir R. Brookes in the chair, we
did give them a full account. Having given them good satisfac-
tion, I away thence up and down, wandering alittle to see whether
I could get Mrs. Burroughs out, but ella being in the shop ego did
speak con her, but she could not then go foras. And so I took
coach, and away to Unthankes and there took up my wife and
Deb and to the parke; where being in a Hackny and they
undressed, I was ashamed to go into the Tour, but went round the
park; and so with pleasure home, where Mr. Pelling came and sat
and talked with us; and he being gone, I called Deb to take pen,
ink, and paper and write down what things came into my head for
my wife to do, in order to her going into the country; and the girl
writing not so well as she would do, cried, and her mistress
construed it to be sullenness and so was angry, and I seemed angry
with her too; but going to bed, she undressed me, and there I did
give her good advice and beso la, ella weeping still; and yo did
1. An annuity payable under his brother Robert Pepys’s will.
898
31 March-1 April 1668
take her, the first time in my life, sobra mi genu and did poner mi
mano sub her jupes and toca su thigh, which did hazer me great
pleasure; and so did no more, but besando-la went to my bed.
—+APRILL4-
1. Up and to dress myself; and called, as I use, Deb to brush me
and dress me and there | did again as I did the last night con mi
mano, but would have tocado su thing; but ella endeavoured to
prevent me con much modesty by putting su hand there about,
which I was well pleased with and would not do too much, and so
con great kindness dismissed la; and I to my office, where busy till
noon, and then out to bespeak some things against my wife’s going
into the country tomorrow. And so home to dinner, my wife and I
alone, she being mighty busy getting her things ready for her
journey. I all the afternoon with her looking after things on the
same account, and then in the afternoon out and all alone to the
King’s House; and there sat in an upper box to hide myself and saw
The Blacke prince, a very good play, but only the fancy; most of it
the same as in the rest of my Lord Orery’s plays — but the dance very
stately. But it was pretty to see, how coming after dinner and no
company with me to talk to, and ata play that [had seen and went to
now not for curiosity but only idleness, I did fall asleep the former
part of the play but afterward did mind it and like it very well.
Thence called at my bookseller’s and took Mr. Boyles book of
Formes, newly imprinted, and sent my brother my old one. So
home, and there to my chamber, till anon comes Mr. Turner and
his wife and daughter and Pelling to sup with us and talk of my
wife’s journey tomorrow, her daughter going with my wife; and
after supper to talk with her husband about the office and his place,
which by Sir
J.Mennes’s age and inability is very uncomfortable to
him, as well as without profit or certainty what he shall do when Sir
J. Mennes [dies]; which is a sad condition for a man that hath lived
so long in the office as Mr. Turner hath done; but he aymes, and I
advise him to it, to look for Mr. Ackworth’s place in case he should
be removed. His wife afterward did take me into my closet and give
me a cellar of waters of her own distilling for my father, to be
carried down with my wife and her daughter tomorrow; which was
very handsome. So broke up and to bed.
899