1668-10-30

Up betimes, and Mr. Povy comes to even accounts with me;
which we did, and then fell to other talk; he tells me, in short, how
the King is made a child of by Buckingham and Arlington, to the
lessening of the Duke of York, whom they cannot suffer to be
great, for fear of my Lord Chancellors return; which therefore they
make the King violent against. That he believes it is impossible
these two great men can hold together long — or at least that the
ambition of the former is so great that he will endeavour to master
all, and bring into play as many as he can. That Anglesy will not
lose his place easily, but will contend in law with whoever comes to
execute it. That the Duke of York, in all things but in his codpiece,
is led by the nose by his wife. That he doth believe that these present
great men will break in time, and that W. Coventry will be a great
man again; for he doth labour to have nothing to do in matters of
the State, and is so useful to the side that he is on, that he will stand,
though at present he is quite out of play. This done, he and I to talk
of my coach, and I got him to go see it; where he finds most infinite
fault with it, both as to being out of fashion and heavy; with so good
reason, that 1am mightily glad of his having corrected me in it; and
so I do resolve to have one of his build, and with his advice, both in
coach and horses, he being the fittest man in the world for it. And so
he carried me home and said the same to my wife. So I to the office
and he away; and at noon Ihome to dinner and all the afternoon late,
with Gibson at my chamber late, about my present great business;
only, a little in the afternoon at the office about Sir D. Gawden’s
accounts; and so to bed and slept heartily; my wife and I at good
peace, but my heart troubled and her mind notat ease Iperceive, she
against andIfor the girl; to whom I have not said anything these
three days — but resolve to be mighty strange in appearance to her.
This night, W. Batelier came and took his leave of us, he setting out
for France to-morrow.