1668-05-10

Lords day. Up, and to my office, there to do business till
church time, when Mr. Sheply, lately come to town, came to see
me; and we had some discourse of all matters, and perticularly of
my Lord Sandwiches concernments; and here he did by the by, as
he would seem, tell me that my Lady had it in her thoughts, if she
had occasion, to borrow t1ool of me — which I did not declare any
opposition to, though I doubt it will be so much lost; but however,
Iwill not deny my Lady ifshe ask it, whatever comes of it, though it
be lost; but shall be glad that it isno bigger sum. And yet it vexes me
though, and the more because it brings into my head some
apprehensions what trouble Imay hereafter be brought to when my
Lord comes home, if he should ask me to come into bonds with
him, as [I] fear he will have occasions to take up money. But Ihope I
shall have the wit to deny it. He being gone, I to church and so
home; and there comes W. Hewer and Balty, and by and by I sent
for Mercer to come and dine with me-—and pretty merry. And after
dinner I fell to teach her Canite Jehove, which she did a great part
presently. And so she away, and Ito church, and from church home
with my Lady Pen; and after being there an hour or so talking, I
took her and Mrs. Lowther, and old Mrs. Whistler her mother-in-
law, by water with great pleasure as far as Chelsy; and so back to
Spring garden at Foxhall and there walked and eat and drank; and so
to water again and set down the old woman at home at Durham
yard; and it raining all the way, it troubles us; but however, my
cloak kept us all dry; and so home, and at the Tower wharf there we
did send for a pair of old shoes for Mrs. Lowther, and there I did
pull the others off and put them on, and did endeavour para tocar su
thigh but ella had drawers on, but yo did besar la and tocar sus
mamelles, ella being poco shy but doth speak con mighty kindness
to me that she would desire me por su marido ifit were to be done.
Here stayed a little at Sir W. Penn’s, who was gone to bed, it being
about 11 at night; and so I home to bed.
907