1668-02-10

Up, and by coach to Westminster and there made a visit to
873
1668 10 February
Mr. Godolphin at his chamber; and I do find him a very pretty and
able person, a man of very fine parts and infinite zeal to my Lord
Sandwich, and one that says he is, he believes, as wise and able a
person as any prince in the world hath. He tells me that he meets
with unmannerly usage by Sir Robt. Southwell in Portugall, who
would sign with him in his negotiations there, being a forward
young man, but that my Lord maister[ed] him in that point, it being
ruled for my Lord here at a hearing of a committee of the Council.
He says that if my Lord can compass a peace between Spain and
Portugall, and hath the doing of it and the honour himself, it will be
a thing of more honour then ever any man hath, and of as much
advantage. Thence to Westminster hall, where the Hall mighty full;
and among other things, the House begins to sit today, and the
King came. But before the King’s coming, the House of Commons
met; and upon information given them of a Bill intended to be
brought in, as common report said, for Comprehension, they did
mightily and generally inveigh against it, and did vote that the King
should be desired by the House, and the message delivered by the
Privy counsellors of the House, that the laws against breakers of the
Act of Uniformity should be put in execution. And it was moved in
the House that if any people had a mind to bring any new laws into
the House about religion, they might come as a proposer of new
laws did in Athens, with ropes about their necks. By and by the
King comes to the Lords’ House and there tells them of his league
with Holland — and the necessity of a fleet, and his debts and
therefore want of money; and his desire that they would think of
some way to bring in all his protestant subjects to a right
understanding and peace one with another, meaning the Bill of
Comprehension. The Commons coming to their House, it was
moved that the vote passed this morning might be suspended,
because of the King’s speech, till the House was full and called over
two days hence; but it was denied, so furious they are against this
Bill; and thereby a great blow either given to the King and
presbyters; or, which is the rather of the two, to the House itself, by
denying a thing desired by the King and so much desired by much
the greater part of the nation. Whatever the consequence be, if the
King be a man of any stomach and heat, all do believe that he will
resent this vote. Thence with Creed home to my house to dinner,
where I met with Mr. Jackson and find my wife angry with Deb,
which vexes me. After dinner by coach away to Westminster,
taking up a friend of Mr. Jacksons, a young lawyer; and parting
874
with Creed at Whitehall, they and I to Westminster hall; and there
met Roger Pepys and with him to his chamber and there read over
and agreed upon the deed of Settlement to our minds: my sister to
have 600! presently and she to be joyntured in 60/ per annum —
wherein I am very well satisfied.