1669-04-17

Upandto the office, where all the morning. At noon home to
dinner, and there find Mr. Pierce the surgeon, and he dined with us;
and there hearing that The Alchymist was acted, we did go and took
him with us, at the King’s House; and is still a good play, it having
not been acted for two or three years before; but I do miss Clun for
the Doctor — but more, my eyes will not let me enjoy the pleasure I
used to have in a play. Thence with my wife in hackney to Sir W.
Coventry’s; who being gone to the park, we drove after him; and
there met him coming out and fallowed him home, and there sent
my wife to Unthankes while Ispent an hour with him, reading over
first my draft of the Administracion of the Navy, which he doth
like very well. And so fell to talk of other things; and among the
rest, of the story of his late disgrace, and how basely and in a mean
manner the Duke of Buckingham hath proceeded against him, not
like a man of honour. He tells me that the King will not give other
answer about his coming to kiss his hands then “not yett’’. But he
says that this that he desires, of kissing the King’s hand, is only to
show to the world that he is not a discontent, and not in any desire
to come again into play; though I do perceive that he speaks this
with less earnestness then heretofore; and this, it may [be], is from
what he told me lately, that the King is offended at what is talked:
that he hath declared himself desirous not to have to do with any
imployment more. But he doth tell me that the leisure he hath yet
had doth notat all begin to be burdensome to him, he knowing how
to spend his time with content to him; and that he hopes shortly to
contract his expense, so as that he shall not be under any straits in
that respect neither — and so seems to be in very good condition of
content. Thence I away over the park, it being now night, to
Whitehall, and there in the Duchess’s chamber to find the Duke of
York; and upon my offer to speak with him, he did come to me; and
withdrew to his closet and there did hear and approve my paper of
the Administration of the Navy; only, did bid me alter these words,
“upon the rupture between the late King and the Parliament,” to
these, “the beginning of the late Rebellion;” giving it me as but
reason to show that it was with the Rebellion that the Navy was put
by out of its old good course into that of a Commission.