1669-04-18

Lords day. Up, and all morning till 2 a-clock at my office with
Gibson and Tom, about drawing up fair my discourse of the
Administracion of the Navy. And then Mr. Spong being come to
dine with me, I in to dinner and then out to my office again to
1009
examine the fair draft; and so borrowing Sir
J.Mennes’s coach, he
going with Commissioner Middleton, I to Whitehall, where we all
met and did sign it; and then to my Lord Arlington’s, where the
King and Duke of York and Prince Rupert, as also Ormond and the
two Secretaries, with my Lord Ashly and Sir T. Clifford, was; and
there, by and by being called in, Mr. Williamson did read over our
paper, which was ina letter to the Duke of York, bound up in a
book with the Duke of York’s book of Instructions. He read it well;
and after read, we were bid to withdraw, nothing being at all said to
it. And by and by we were called in again, and nothing said to that
business but another begun, about the state of this year’s Action and
our wants of money, as I had stated the same lately to our
Treasurers — which I was bid, and did largely and with great
content, open; and having so done, we all withdrew and left them
to debate our supply of money; after which, being called in and
referred to attend on the Lords of the Treasury, we all departed; and
I only stayed in the House till the Council rose, and then to the
Duke of York, who in the Duchess’s chamber came to me and told
me that the book was there left with my Lord Arlington, for any of
the Lords to view that had a mind, and to prepare and present to the
King what they had to say in writing to any part of it; which is all we
can desire, and so that rested. The Duke of York then went to other
talk; and by and by comes the Prince of Tuscany to visit him and the
Duchess, and I find that he doth still remain Incognito, and so
intends to do all the time he stays here — for avoiding trouble to the
King and himself, and expense also to both. Thence I to Whitehall
gate, thinking to have found Sir. J. Mennes’s coach staying for me;
but not being there, and this being the first day of rain we have had
many a day, the streets being as dusty as in summer, I forced to
walk to my cousin Turner’s, and there find my wife newly gone
home, which vexed me; and so I having kissed and taken leave of
Betty, who goes to Putny to school tomorrow, I walked through
the rain to the Temple and there with much ado got a coach; and so
home and there to supper, and Pelling comes to us; and after much
talk we parted and to bed.