1669-05-13

Up and to the office, where all the morning, it being a rainy
foul day. But at noon comes my Lord Hinchingbrooke and Sidny
and Sir Ch. Herberd and Rogr. Pepys, and dined with me; and hada
good dinner, and very merry, and with us all the afternoon, it being
a farewell to Sidny; and so in the evening, they away and I to my
business at the office; and so to supper and talk with my brother,
and so to bed.
1019
1669 14 May
14. Up, and to St. James’s to the Duke of York and thence to
Whitehall, where we met about office business; and then at noon to
dinner with Mr. Wren to Lambeth, with the Archbishop of
Canterbury; the first time I was ever there, and I have long longed
for it— where a noble house, and well furnished with good pictures
and furniture, and noble attendance in good order, anda great deal
of company, though an ordinary day, and exceeding great cheer,
nowhere better, or so much that ever I think I saw for an ordinary
table. And the Bishop mighty kind to me, perticularly desiring my
company another time, when less company there. Most of the
company gone, and I going, Iheard by a gentleman of a sermon that
was to be there; and so I stayed to hear it, thinking it serious, till by
and by the gentleman told me it was a mockery by one Cornet
Bolton, a very gentleman-like man, that behind a chair did pray and
preach like a presbyter-Scot that ever I heard in my life, with all the
possible imitation in grimaces and voice — and his text about the
hanging up their harps upon the willows — and a serious good
sermon too, exclaiming against Bishops and crying up of my good
Lord Eglington —till it made us all burst; but I did wonder to have
the Bishop make himself at this time to make himself sport with
things of this kind, but I perceive it was shown him asa rarity. And
he took care to have the room-door shut, but there was about
twenty gentlemen there — and myself infinitely pleased with the
novelty. So over to Whitehall to a little Committee of Tanger; and
thence walking in the Gallery, I met Sir Tho. Osborne, who to my
great content did of his own accord fall into discourse with me,
with so much professions of value and respect, placing the whole
virtue of the office of the Navy upon me, and that for the
Controller’s place, no man in England was fit for it but me when Sir
J. Mennes, as he says it is necessary, is removed — but then, knows
not what to do for a man in my place; and in discourse, though I
have no mind to the other, did bring in Tom Hater to be the fittest
man in the world for it — which he took good notice of. But in the
whole, I was mightily pleased, reckoning myself now 50 per cent
securer in my place then I did before think myself to be. Thence to
Unthankes and there find my wife, but not dressed; which vexed
me, because of going to the park, it being a most pleasant day after
yesterday’s rain, which lays all the dust, and most people going out
thither, which vexed me. So home, sullen; but then my wife and I
by water, with my brother, as high as Fulham, talking and singing
and playing the rogue with the western bargemen about the women
1020
of Woolwich, which mads them. And so back home to supper and
to bed.