1669-04-31

Up and by water to W. Coventry, there to talk with him
about business of the Navy, and received from him direction what
to advise the Duke of York at this time; which was, to submit and
give way to the King’s naming a man or two that the people about
him havea mind should be brought into the Navy, and perhaps that
may stop their fury in running further against the whole — and this
he believes will do it. After much discourse with him, I walked out
with him into St. James’s park; where being afeared to be seen with
him (he having not leave yet to kiss the King’s hand, but notice
taken, as I hear, of all that go to him) I did take the pretence of my
attending [the] Tanger Committee to take my leave; though to
serve him, I should I think stick at nothing. At the Committee this
morning, my Lord Middleton declares at last his being ready to go
as soon as ever money can be made ready to pay the garrison. And
so I have orders to get money, but how soon I know not. Thence
home and there find Mr. Sheres, for whom I find my moher of late
to talk with mighty kindness; and perticularly, he hath shown
himself to be a poet, and that she doth mightily value him for. He
did not stay to dine with us; but we to dinner, and then in the
afternoon, my wife being very well dressed by her new maid, we
abroad to make a visit to Mrs. Pickering; but she abroad again, and
sO we never yet saw her. Thence to Dancre’s and there saw our
pictures which are in doing, and I did choose a view of Rome
instead of Hampton Court —and mightily pleased Ishall be in them.
Here was Sir Ch. Cotterell and his son, bespeaking something;
1004
31 March—s5 April 1669
both ingenious men IJhear. Thence my wife and I to the park, and
pretty store of company, and so home with great content: and so
ends the month — my mind in pretty good content for all things but
the designs on foot to bring alterations in the Office; which troubles
me.
—APRILL2-
2. Up and by water to Whitehall, and there with the Office
attended the Duke of York, and stayed in Whitehall till about noon;
and so with W. Hewer to the Cock, and there he and I dined alone
with great content, he reading to me, for my memory sake, my late
collections of the history of the Navy, that I might represent the
same by and by to the Duke of York; and so after dinner he and I to
Whitehall and there to the Duke of York’s lodgings, whither he by
and by, by his appointment, came; and alone with him an hour in
his closet, telling him mine and W. Coventry’s advice touching the
present posture of the Navy, as the Duke of Buckingham and the
rest do now labour to make changes therein; and that it were best
for him to suffer the King to be satisfied with the bringing in of a
man or two which they desire. I did also give the Duke of York a
short account of the history of the Navy, as to our Office,
wherewith he was very well satisfied; but I do find that he is pretty
stiff against their bringing in of men against his mind, as the
Treasurers were, and perticularly against Child’s coming in,
because he is a merchant. This night I did bring home from the
King’s potticary’s in Whitehall, by Mr. Cooling’s direction, a water
that he says did him mighty good for his eyes; I pray God it may do
me good, but by his description, his disease was the same as mine,
and this doth encourage me to use it.
5. To the Mullberry garden, where Sheres is to treat us with a
Spanish Oleo by a cook of his acquaintance that is there, that was
with my Lord in Spain. And without any other company, he did do
it, and mighty nobly; and the Oleo was endeed a very noble dish,
such as I never saw better, or any more of. This, and the discourse
he did give us of Spain, and description of the Escuriall, was a fine
treat. So we left other things that would keep till night for a
collation — and with much content took coach again and went five
1005
or six miles towards Branford: the Prince of Tuscany, who comes
into England only to spend money and see our country, comes into
the town today, and is much expected; and we met him, but the
coach passing by apace, we could not see much of him, but he seems
a very jolly and good comely man. By the way we overtook Capt.
Ferrers upon his fine Spanish horse; and he is a fine horse endeed,
but not so good, Ithink, as Ihave seen some. He did ride by us most
of the way, and with us to the park and there he left us, where we
passed the evening; and meeting The[oph]. Turner, Talbt., W.
Batelier and his sister in coach, we anon took them with us to the
Mullberry garden; and there, after a walk, to supper upon what was
left at noon, and very good; only, Mr. Sheres being taken suddenly
ill for a while did spoil our mirth; but by and by was well again, and
we inighty merry. And so broke up, and left him at Charing cross;
and so calling only at my cousin Turner’s, away home, mightily
pleased with that day’s work: and this day came another new mayd
for a middle-maid, but her name I know not yet — and for a cook-
maid, we have ever since Bridget went used a blackmoore of Mr.
Batelier’s (Doll), who dresses our meat mighty well, and we
mightily pleased with her. So by and by to bed.