1669-05-19

With my coach to St. James, and there, finding the Duke of
York gone to muster his men in Hyde park, I alone with my boy
thither; and there saw more, walking out of my coach as other
gentlemen did, of a soldier’s trade then ever I did in my life — the
men being mighty fine, and their commanders, perticularly the
Duke of Monmouth; but methought their trade but very easy, as to
the mustering of their men, and the men but indifferently ready to
perform what was commanded in the handling their arms. Here
news was first talked of Harry Killigrews’ being wounded in nine
places last night by footmen in the highway, going from the park in
a hackney coach toward Hammersmith to his house at Turnam
greene — they being supposed to be my Lady Shrewsbury’s men —
she being by in her coach with six horses. Upon an old grudge, of
his saying openly that he had lain with her. Thence by and by to
Whitehall, and there I waited upon the King and Queen all dinner-
time in the Queen’s lodgings, she being in her white pinner and
apern, like a woman with child; and she seemed handsomer, plain
_so, then dressed. And by and by, dinner done, I out and to walk in
the Gallery for the Duke of York’s coming out; and there meeting
Mr. May, he took me down about 4 a-clock to Mr. Chevins’s
lodgings, and all alone did get me a dish of cold chickens and good
wine, and I dined like a prince, being before very hungry and
empty. By and by the Duke of York comes, and readily took me to
his closet and received my petition, and discoursed it about my eyes
and pitied me, and with much kindness did give me his consent to
be absent, and approved of my proposition to go into Holland to
observe things there of the Navy, but would first ask the King’s
leave; which he anon did, and did tell me that the King would be
1021
‘‘a good maister to me”’ (these were his words about my eyes) and
doth like of my going into Holland, but doth advise that nobody
should know of my going thither — but pretend that Idid go into the
country somewhither
— which Iliked well. Glad of this, Ihome; and
thence took out my wife and to Mr. Holliards about a swelling in
her cheek, but he not at home; and so round by Islington and eat and
drink; and so home and after supper, to bed.