1669-04-20

Upand to the office, and my wife abroad with Mary Batelier
with our own coach, but borrowed Sir
J.Mennes’s coachman, that
so our own might stay at home to attend at dinner, our family being
mightily disordered by our little boy’s falling sick the last night, and
we fear it will prove the smallpox. At noon comes my guest, Mr.
Hugh May, and with him Sir Henry Capell, my old Lord Capells
son, and Mr. Packer; and I had a pretty dinner for them, and both
before and after dinner had excellent discourse, and showed them
my closet and my office and the method of it, to their great content;
and more extraordinary manly discourse, and opportunity of
showing myself and learning from others, I have not in ordinary
discourse had in my life — they being all persons of worth; but
especially Sir H. Capell, whose being a Parliament[-man] and
hearing my discourse in the Parliament-house hath, as May tells
me, given hima long desire to know and discourse with me. In the
afternoon we walked to the old Artillery ground near the
Spitalfields, where I never was before; but now, by Capt. Deanes
invitation, did go to see his new gun tryed, this being the place
where the officers of the Ordnance do try all their great guns; and
when we came, did find that the trial had been made, and they
going away with extraordinary report of the proof of his gun,
which, from the shortness and bigness, they do call “‘punchinello’”’.
But I desired Coll. Legg to stay and give us a sight of her
performance, which he did; and there, in short, against a gun more
then as long and as heavy again, and charged with as much powder
again, she carried the same bullet as strong to the mark, and nearer
and above the mark at a point-blank then theirs, and is more easily
managed and recoyls no more then that — which is a thing so
extraordinary, as to be admired for the happiness of his invention,
and to the great regret of the old gunners and officers of the
Ordinance that were there; only, Coll. Legg did do her much right
in his report of her. And so having seen this great and first
experiment, we all parted, I seeing my guests into a hackney coach,
IOI!
and myself, with Capt. Deane, taking a hackney, did go out toward
Bow and went as far as Stratford, and all the way talking of this
invention, and he offering me a third of the profit of the invention;
which, for aught I know or do at present think, may prove matter
considerable to us; for either the King will give him a reward for it,
ifhe keeps it to himself, or he will give us a patent to make our profit
of it; and no doubt but it will be of profit to merchantmen and
others, to have guns of the same force at half the charge. This was
our talk; and then to talk of other things of the Navy in general; and
among other things, he did tell me that he doth hear how the Duke
of Buckingham hath a spite at me, which I knew before but value it
not; and he tells me that Sir T. Allen is not my friend; but for all this
I am not much troubled, for I know myself so useful, that, as I
believe, they will not part with me; so I thank [God], my condition
is such that I can retire and be able to live with comfort, though not
with abundance. Thus we spent the evening with extraordinary
good discourse, to my great content; and so home to the office and
there did some business; and then home, where my wife doth come
home, and Ivexed at her staying out so late; but she tells me that she
hath been at home with M. Batelier a good while, so I made nothing
of it — but to supper and to bed.