1669-01-23

Up, and again to look after the setting things right against
dinner, which Idid to very good content; and so to the office, where
all the morning till noon, when word brought me to the Board that
my Lord Sandwich was come; soI presently rose, leaving the Board
ready to rise, and there I found my Lord Sandwich, Peterburgh,
and Sir Ch. Herberd; and presently after them come my Lord
Hinchingbrooke, Mr. Sidny, and Sir Wm. Godolphin; and after
greeting them, and some time spent in talk, dinner was brought up,
one dish after another, but a dish at a time; but all so good, but
above all things, the variety of wines, and excellent of their kind, I
had for them, and all in so good order, that they were mightily
pleased, and myself full of content at it, and endeed it was, of a
dinner of about six or eight dishes, as noble as any man need to have
I think — at least, all was done in the noblest manner that ever I had
any, and I have rarely seen in my life better anywhere else — even at
the Court. After dinner, my Lords to cards, and the rest of us sitting
about them and talking, and looking on my books and pictures and
my wife’s drawings, which they commend mightily; and mighty
merry all day long, with exceeding great content, and so till 7 at
night; and so took their leaves, it being dark and foul weather. Thus
was this entertainment over, the best of its kind, and the fullest of
honour and content to me that ever I had in my life, and shall not
easily have so good again. The truth is, I have some fear that lam
run behindhand in the world for these last two years, since I have
not, or for some time could not, look after my accounts; which
dotha
little allay my pleasure, but I do trust in God I am pretty well
yet, and resolve ina very little time to look into my accounts and see
how they stand. So to my wife’s chamber, and there supped and got
her cut my hair and look my shirt, for I have itched mightily these
six or seven days; and when all came to all, she finds that 1am louzy,
having found in my head and body above 20 lice, little and great;
which I wonder at, being more then I have hadI believe almost
these 20 years. I did think I might have got them from the little boy,
but they did presently look him, and found none — so how they
came, I know not; but presently did shift myself, and so shall be rid
of them, and cut my hayre close to my head. And so, with much
content to bed.