1669-02-31

Lords day. Lay long, talking with pleasure, and so up, and I to
church and there did hear the Doctor that is lately turned Divine, I
have forgot his name, I met hima while since at Sir D. Gawden’s at
dinner — Dr. Waterhouse; he preaches in devout manner of way, not
elegant nor very persuasive, but seems to mean well and that he
would preach holily, and was mighty passionate against people that
make a scoff of religion. And the truth is, I did observe Mrs.
Hallworthy smile often, and many others of the parish, who I
perceive have known him and were in mighty expectation of
hearing him preach, but could not forbear smiling; and she
perticularly upon me, and I on her. So home to dinner; and before
dinner, to my office to set down my journal for this week, and then
983
1669 31 January—1 February
home to dinner
— and after dinner, to get my wife and boy, one after
another, to read to me~and so spent the afternoon and the evening;
and so after supper, to bed. And thus ended this month, with many
different days of sadness and mirth, from differences between me
and my wife, from her remembrance of my late unkindness to her
with Willet, she not being able to forget it, but now and then hath
her passionate remembrance of it, as often as prompted to it by any
occasion; but this night we are at present very kind. And so ends
this month.
‘ ~+FEBRUARY»-
1. Up and by water from the Tower to Whitehall, the first time
that I have gone to that end of the town by water for two or three
months I think, since Ikept a coach — which God send propitious to
me — but it is a very great convenience. I went to a Committee of
Tanger, but it did not meet; and so I meeting Mr. Povy, he and I
away to Dancres to speak something touching the pictures I am
getting him to make for me. And thence he carried me to Mr.
Streeters the famous history-painter over the way, whom I have
often heard of but did never see him before; and there I found him
and Dr. Wren and several virtuosos looking upon the paintings
which he is making for the new Theatre at Oxford; and endeed,
they look as they would be very fine, and the rest thinks better then
those of Rubens in the Banqueting-house at Whitehall, but I do not
so fully think so — but they will certainly be very noble, and I am
mightily pleased to have the fortune to see this man and his work,
which is very famous — and hea very civil little man and lame, but
lives very handsomely. So thence to my Lord Bellasses and met him
within; my business only to see a chimney-piece of Dancre’s doing
in distemper with egg to keep off the glaring of the light, which |
must have done for my room; and endeed it is pretty, but I must
confess I do not think it is not altogether so beautiful as the oyle
pictures; but I will have some of one and some of another. Thence
set him down at Little Turnstile, and so I home; and there eata
little
dinner, and away with my wife by coach to the King’s playhouse,
thinking to have seen The Heyresse, first acted on Saturday last; but
when we came thither, we find no play there — Kinaston, that did
act a part therein in abuse to Sir Charles Sidly, being last night
984
exceedingly dry-beaten with sticks by two or three that assaulted
him —so as he is mightily bruised, and forced to keep his bed. So we
to the Duke of York’s playhouse, and there saw Shee Would ifShe
Could. And so home and to my office to business, and then to
supper and to bed.
[3.] So up, and to the office till noon and then home toalittle
dinner; and thither again till night, mighty busy, to my great
content doing a great deal of business; and so home to supper and to
bed — I finding this day that I may be able to do a great deal of
business by dictateing, if I do not read myself or write, without
spoiling my eyes, I being very well in my eyes after a great day’s
work.