1669-03-24

Up and walked about in the garden, and I find that Mrs.
Tooker hath not any of her daughters here as I expected. And so
walked to the yard, leaving Middleton at the pay; and there I only
walked up and down the yard, and then to the Hill house and there
did give order for the coach to be made ready and got Mr. Gibson,
whom I carried with me, to go with me and Mr. Coney the surgeon
towards Maydston, which I had a mighty mind to see; and took
occasion in my way, at St. Margetts, to pretend to call to see Capt.
Allen, to see whether Mrs. Jowles his daughter was there; and there
his wife came to the door, he being at London, and through a
window I spied Jowles, but took no notice of her; but made excuse
till night, and then promised to come and see Mrs. Allen again; and
so away, it being a mighty cold and windy, but clear day, and had
the pleasure of seeing the Medway running, winding up and down
mightily, and a very fine country; and I went a
little way out of the
way to have visited SirJo. Bankes, but he at London; but here I had
a sight of his seat and house, the outside, which is an old abbey just
like Hinchingbrooke, and as good at least, and mighty finely placed
by the river; and he keeps the grounds about it, and walls and the
house, very handsome —I was mightily pleased with the sight of it.
Thence to Maydstone, which I had a mighty mind to see, having
never been there; and walked all up and down the town, and up to
the top of the steeple and had a noble view, and then down again
and in the town did see an old man beating of Flax, and did step into
the barn and give him money and saw that piece of husbandry,
which I never saw, and it is very pretty. In the street also, I did buy
and send to our Inne, the Bell, a dish of fresh fish; and so having
walked all round the town, and find it very pretty as most towns I
ever saw, though not very big, and people of good fashion in it, we
to our Inne to dinner, and had a good dinner; and after dinner a
barber came to me and there trimmed me, that I might be clean
against night to go to Mrs. Allen; and so staying till about 4 a-clock,
we set out, I alone in the coach going and coming; and in our way
back, I light out of the way to see a Saxon monument, as they say,
of a king; which is three stones staying upright anda great round
one lying on them, of great bigness, although not so big as those on
Salsbury-plain, but certainly it is a thing of great antiquity, and I
mightily glad to see it; it is near to Alesford, where Sir Jo. Bankes
IOOI
lives. So homeward and stopped again at Capt. Allen’s and there
light, and sent the coach and Gibson home and I and Cony stayed;
and there comes to us Mrs. Jowles, who isa very fine proper lady as
most I know, and well dressed. Here was also a gentleman, one
Maj. Manly, and his wife, neighbours; and here we stayed and
drank and talked, and set Cony and him to play while Mrs. Jowles
and I to talk, and there had all our old stories up; and there I had the
liberty to salute her often and pull off her glove, where her hand
mighty moist; and she mighty free in kindness to me, and yo do not
at all doubt but Imight have had todo that yo would have desired de
ella had I had time to have carried her to Cobham; as she, upon my
proposing it, was willing to go, for ella is a whore, that is certain,
but a very: brave and comely one. Here was a pretty cousin of hers
came in to supper also, of a great fortune, daughter-in-law to this
Manly; mighty pretty, but had now such a cold, she could not
speak.
Here mightily pleased with Mrs. Jowles, and did get her to the
street-door in the dark, and there toca su breasts and besar her
without any force, and creo that I might have hecho algo else; but it
was not time nor place. Here stayed till almost 12 at night; and then
with a lanthorn from thence walked over the fields, as dark as pitch,
and mighty cold and snow, to Chatham, and Mr. Cony with great
kindness with me; and there all in bed before I came home, and so I
presently to bed.