1669-02-10

Up, and with my wife and W. Hewer; she set us down at
Whitehall, where the Duke of York was gone a-hunting; and so
after I had donea
little business there, I to my wife, and with her to
the Plasterer’s at Charing cross that casts heads and bodies in
plaster, and there I had my whole face done; but I was vexed first to
be forced to daub all my face over with Pomatum, but it was pretty
to feel how saft and easily it is done on the face, and by and by, by
degrees, how hard it becomes, that you cannot break it, and sits so
close that you cannot pull it off, and yet so easy that it is as soft as a
pillow, so safe is everything where many parts of the body do bear
alike. Thus was the mold made; but when it came off, there was
little pleasure in it as it looks in the mold, nor any resemblance
whatever there will be in the figure when I come to see it cast off —
which I am to call for a day or two hence; whichI shall long to see.
Thence to Hercules Pillars, and there my wife and W. Hewer and I
986
dined. So to Whitehall, where I stayed till the Duke of York came
from hunting, which he did by and by; and when dressed, did come
out to dinner, and there I waited; and he did tell me that tomorrow
was to be the great day that the business of the Navy would be
discoursed of before the King and his Caball; and that he must stand
on his guard and did design to have had me in readiness by, but
upon second thoughts did think it better to let it alone. But they are
now upon entering into the AEconimicall part of the Navy. Here he
dined, and did mightily magnify his Sawce which he did then eat
with everything, and said it was the best universal sauce in the
world — it being taught him by the Spanish Imbassador — made of
some parsley and a dry toast, beat in a mortar together with
vinegar, salt, anda little pepper. He eats it with flesh or fowl or fish.
And then he did now mightily commend some new sort of wine
lately found out, called Navarr wine; which I tasted, and is I think
good wine; but I did like better the notion of the Sawce and by and
by did taste it, and liked it mightily. After dinner I did what I went
for, which was to get his consent that Balty might hold his muster-
maister’s place by deputy, in his new imployment whichI design
for him about the Storekeeper’s accounts; which the Duke of York
did grant me, and I was mighty glad of it. Thence to the office, and
there very busy and did much business till late at night; and so home
to supper, and with great pleasure to bed.