1669-03-04

Up, anda while at the office; but thinking to have Mr. Povy’s
business today at the Committee for Tanger, I left the Board and
away to Whitehall; where in the first court I did meet Sir Jere.
Smith, who did tell me that Sir W. Coventry was just now sent to
the tower about the business of his challenging the Duke of
Buckingham, and so was also Harry Savill to the Gate-house —
which, as a gentleman and of the Duke of York’s bed-chamber, I
heard afterward that the Duke of York is mightily incensed at, and
doth appear very high to the King that he might not be sent thither,
993
1669 4 March
but to the Tower — this being done only in contempt to him. This
news of Sir W. Coventry did strike me to the heart; and with
reason, for by this and my Lord of Ormond’s business, I do doubt
that the Duke of Buckingham will be so fleshed, that he will not
stop at anything but be forced to do anything now, as thinking it
not safe to end here; and Sir W. Coventry being gone, the King will
have never a good counsellor, nor the Duke of York any sure friend
to stick to him — nor any good many will be left to advise what is
good. So meeting with my Lord Bellasses, he told me the
perticulars of this matter; that it arises about a quarrel which Sir W.
Coventry had with the Duke of Buckingham about a design
between him and Sir Rob. Howard to bring him into a play at the
King’s House. Being very much troubled at this, | away by coach
homeward, and directly to the Tower, where I find him in one Mr.
Bennet’s house, in the Bricke tower — where I find him busy with
my Lord Halifax and his brother; so I would not stay to interrupt
them, but only to give him comfort and offer my service to him;
and so I parted, with great content that I had so earlily seen him
there; and so going out, did meet Sir Jer. Smith going to meet me,
who had newly been with Sir W. Coventry; and so he and I by
water to Redriffe, and so walked to Deptford, where I have not
been I think these twelve months; and there to the Treasurer’s
house, where the Duke of York is, and his Duchesse; and there we
find them at dinner in the great room, unhung, and there was with
them my Lady Duchess of Monmouth, the Countess of Falmouth,
Castlemayne, Henrietta Hide my Lady Hinchingbrooke’s sister,
and my Lady Peterbrough. And after dinner, Sir Jer. Smith and I
were invited down to dinner with some of the Maids of Honour;
viz., Mrs. Ogle, Blake, and Howard (which did me good to have
the honour to dine with and look on); and the Mother of the Maids,
and Mrs. Howard, the mother of the Maid of Honour of that name,
and the Duke’s housekeeper here. Here was also Monsieur
Blancfort, Sir Rd. Powell, Coll. Villers, Sir Jona. Trelany, and
others. And here drank most excellent and great variety and plenty
of wines, more then I have drank at once these seven years, but yet
did me no great hurt. Having dined and very merry, and
understanding by Blancfort how angry the Duke of York was
about their offering to send Savill to the Gate-house among the
rogues and talking of others as their enemies — they parted; and so
we up, and there J did find the Duke of York and Duchess with all
the great ladies, sitting upon a carpet on the ground, there being no
994
chairs, playing at ‘‘I love my love with an A because he is so and so;
and I hate him with an A because of this and that;”’ and some of
them, but perticularly the Duchess herself and my Lady Castle-
maine, were very witty. This done, they took barge, and I with Sir
J. Smith to Capt. Cox’s and there to talk, and left them and other
company to drink while I slunk out to Bagwells and there saw her
and her mother and our late maid Nell, who cried for joy to see me;
but Ihad no time for pleasure there nor could stay; but after drinking,
Iback to the yard, having a month’s mind para have had a bout with
Nell—whichI believe Icould have had—and may another time. So to
Cox’s and thence walked with Sir
J.Smith back to Redriffe, and so
by water home; and there my wife mighty angry for my absence and
feil mightily out; but not being certain of anything, but think([s] only
that Pierce or Knepp were there, and did ask me, and I perceive the
boy, many questions, but I did answer her; and so after much ado,
did go to bed and lie quiet all night; but had another bout with me in
the morning, but I did make shift to quiet her, but yet she was not
fully satisfied, poor wretch, in her mind, and thinks much at my
taking so much pleasure from her; which endeed is a fault, though I
did not design or foresee it when I went.