1669-04-13

Sent for W. Hewer and he and Iby water to Whitehall to look,
among other things, Mr. May, to unbespeak his dining with me
tomorrow. But here, being with him in the Courtyard, as God
would have it I spied Deb. which made my heart and head to work;
and I presently could not refrain, but sent W. Hewer away to look
for Mr. Wren (W. Hewer, I perceive, did see her, but whether he
did see me see her I know not, or suspect my sending him away I
know not) but my heart could not hinder me. And I run after her
and two women and a man, more ordinary people, and she in her
old clothes; and after huntingalittle, find them in the lobby of the
Chapel below-stairs; and there Iobserved she endeavoured to avoid
me, but I did speak to her and she to me, and did get her para docere
me ou she demeures now. And did charge her para say nothing of
me that I had vu elle — which she did promise; and so, with my heart
full of surprize and disorder, I away; and meeting with Sir H.
Cholmley, walked into the park with him and back again, looking
to see ifIcould spy her again in the park, but I could not. And so
back to Whitehall, and then back to the park with Mr. May, but
could see her no more; and so with W. Hewer, who I doubt by my
countenance might see some disorder in me, we home by water;
and there I find Talb. Pepys and Mrs. Turner, and Betty too, come
to invite us to dinner on Thursday; and after drinking, Isaw them to
the waterside, and so back home through Crutched Friars, and
there saw Mary Mercer and put off my hat to her on the other side
the way; but it beinga little darkish, she did not, I think, know me
well. And so to my office to put my papers in order, they having
been removed for my closet to be made clean; and so home to my
wife, who is come home from Deptford. But, God forgive me, I
hardly know how to put on confidence enough to speak as
innocent, having had this passage today with Deb, though only,
God knows, by accident. But my great pain is lest God Almighty
shall suffer me to find out this girl, whom endeed I love, and witha
bad amour; but I will pray to God to give me grace to forbear it. So
1007
home to supper, where very sparing in my discourse, not giving
occasion of any enquiry where I have been today, or what I have
done; and so, without any trouble tonight more then my fear, we to
bed.