1669-01-31

Blessed be God, the year ends, after some late very great
sorrow with my wife by my folly; yet ends, Isay, with great mutual
peace and content — and likely to last so by my care, who am
resolved to enjoy the sweet of it which I now possess, by never
giving her like cause of trouble. My greatest trouble is now from
the backwardness of my accounts, which I have not seen the
bottom of now near these two years, so that I know not in what
condition I am in the world; but by the grace of God, as fast as my
eyes will give me leave, I will do it.
975
Aes
al
6 sot
Tage
—+JANUARY%-
1. Up, and presented from Capt. Beckford with a noble silver
warming-pan, which I am doubtful whether to take or no. Up, and
with W. Hewer to the New Exchange, and there he and I to the
cabinet-shops to look out, and did agree for a Cabinett to give my
wife for a New-year’s gift; and I did buy one, cost me 111, which is
very pretty, of Walnutt tree, and will come home tomorrow. So
back to the Old Exchange and there met my uncle Wight; and there
walked and met with the Houblons and talked with them,
gentlemen whom I honour mightily. And so to my uncles and met
my wife, and there, with W. Hewer, we dined with his family and
had a very good dinner, and pretty merry; and after dinner my wife
and I with our coach to the King’s playhouse and there in a box saw
The Mayden Queene. Knepp looked upon us, but I durst not show
her any countenance and, as well as Icould carry myself, Ifound my
wife uneasy there, poor wretch. Therefore I shall avoid that House
as much as I can. So back to my aunts and there supped and talked,
and stayed pretty late, it being dry and moonshine; and so walked
home, and to bed in very good humour.
3. Lords day. Up, and busy all the morning, getting rooms and
dinner ready for my guests; which were my uncle and aunt Wight
and two of their cousins, and an old woman and Mr. Mills and his
wife; and a good dinner and all our plate out, and mighty fine and
merry. Dinner done, J out with W. Hewer and Mr. Spong, who by
accident came to dine with me, and good talk with him, to
Whitehall by coach and there left him, and I with my Brethren to
attend the Duke of York. So home and to supper and read; and there
my wife and I treating about coming to an allowance to my wife for
clothes, and there I, out of my natural backwardness, did hang off;
which vexed her and did occasion some discontented talk in bed
when we went to bed—and also in the morning; but I did recover all
in the morning.
976